From jonathan.gray at okfn.org  Tue Mar  3 16:28:32 2009
From: jonathan.gray at okfn.org (Jonathan Gray)
Date: Tue, 3 Mar 2009 16:28:32 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Fwd: Compilation of material on open science and
	open biology
In-Reply-To: <c776300b0812312201y793ee99y326e93711564ae55@mail.gmail.com>
References: <c776300b0812312201y793ee99y326e93711564ae55@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <54ca21750903030828s5df66e68s5bd26226984f32ce@mail.gmail.com>

Michel Bauwens asked me to forward this on his behalf. All material
below is also available at:

  http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Science

Warm regards,

-- 
Jonathan Gray

Community Coordinator
The Open Knowledge Foundation
http://www.okfn.org


---------- Forwarded message ----------
Great rundown of material, with a lot of usage from the material collated on
the p2pfoundation wiki.

By Bryan Bishop:

Bryan Bishop ? ?View
profile<http://groups.google.com/groups/profile?enc_user=yXg5nREAAACnmNU9tKKhOFqHpeR7zr8WkdEasx1kiYTQavV7mdW13Q>
?More options Dec 30 2008, 9:06 am ? ? From: *"Bryan Bishop"
<kanz...<http://groups.google.com/groups/unlock?_done=/group/diybio/browse_thread/thread/93a354079b5bfdbb/e0a42d0823a87604%3Fpli%3D1&msg=e0a42d0823a87604>
@gmail.com>*
Date: *Mon, 29 Dec 2008 20:06:09 -0600*
Local: *Tues, Dec 30 2008 9:06 am *
Subject: *What's all this about "open", anyway? (long)*
?Reply<http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/post?inreplyto=e0a42d0823a87604&reply_to=group&_done=%2Fgroup%2Fdiybio%2Fbrowse_thread%2Fthread%2F93a354079b5bfdbb%2Fe0a42d0823a87604%3Fpli%3D1%26&>|
Reply
to author<http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/post?inreplyto=e0a42d0823a87604&reply_to=author&_done=%2Fgroup%2Fdiybio%2Fbrowse_thread%2Fthread%2F93a354079b5bfdbb%2Fe0a42d0823a87604%3Fpli%3D1%26&>|
Forward<http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/post?inreplyto=e0a42d0823a87604&forward=1&_done=%2Fgroup%2Fdiybio%2Fbrowse_thread%2Fthread%2F93a354079b5bfdbb%2Fe0a42d0823a87604%3Fpli%3D1%26&>|
Print<http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/e0a42d0823a87604?dmode=print>|
Individual
message <http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/e0a42d0823a87604> | Show
original<http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/e0a42d0823a87604?dmode=source>|
Report
this message<http://groups.google.com/groups/abuse?group=diybio&type=message&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgroups.google.com%2Fgroup%2Fdiybio%2Fmsg%2Fe0a42d0823a87604&_done=%2Fgroup%2Fdiybio%2Fbrowse_thread%2Fthread%2F93a354079b5bfdbb%2Fe0a42d0823a87604%3Fpli%3D1%26&>|
Find
messages by this
author<http://groups.google.com/groups/search?enc_author=yXg5nREAAACnmNU9tKKhOFqHpeR7zr8WkdEasx1kiYTQavV7mdW13Q&scoring=d>
?Hi all,

I don't think we've ever gone explicitly over the idea of the
debian/ubuntu social contracts, and how those concepts might be useful
in pursuing our shared interests as diybio grows. From what I saw at
BioBarCamp 2008, where many of us found each other in person, there's
a lot of positive effort and energy being channeled in these
directions, so the very least I can do is document a little bit of it
from all over the web. This is a draft at best, so go easy on me :-).

This email is more like a safari tour through some relevant portions
of the internet that are of interest to diybio and maybe developing
'contracts', so if somebody else wants to write something more
coherent, go ahead- this is more like bibliography material, but also
interesting for those who don't know about these developments. With
some annotation and running commentary :-). I hope others comment on
some of these excerpts.

((At the bottom and very end is the debian and ubuntu social contracts
or codes of conduct for an example, but it's best taken in context
with everything else in this email)). (((This is also re: IP law and
some other recent topics on the list.)))

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Biotechnology
http://rsss.anu.edu.au/~janeth/ <http://rsss.anu.edu.au/%7Ejaneth/>
http://rsss.anu.edu.au/~janeth/OpenSourceBiotechnology27July2005.pdf<http://rsss.anu.edu.au/%7Ejaneth/OpenSourceBiotechnology27July2005.pdf>(thesis)
"""
"Open Source licensing is a style of intellectual property management
that has evolved in the past half-decade out of the Free Software
movement, initiated in the early 1980s in response to restrictive
copyright licensing practices adopted by commercial software
developers. The Open Source approach seeks to preserve ongoing
community access to proprietary software tools without precluding or
discouraging commercial involvement in their development.

"Open Source Biotechnology" refers to the possibility of extending the
principles of commerce-friendly, commons-based peer production
exemplified by Open Source software development to the development of
research tools in biomedical and agricultural biotechnology."
(http://rsss.anu.edu.au/~janeth/ <http://rsss.anu.edu.au/%7Ejaneth/>)
"""

Janet Hope:
"Since the 1980's, the life sciences have undergone a process of rapid
commercialization. The legal mechanism for this process of
commercialization has been the expansion of intellectual property (IP)
protection to inventions that were previously regarded as
unpatentable. The result has been a literally exponential increase in
applications for biotechnology patents.

These patents not only protect inventions that are valuable as end
products; they also protect early stage inventions and research tools.
Advances in biotechnology require the use of many of the latter, for
which researchers must obtain licenses from patent owners. A good
example is "golden rice", which utilized more than 70 different
patented procedures and processes. To get permission to use all of
these tools, scientists enter into multiple negotiations for each
piece of IP. These mounting transaction costs can retard, and in some
cases completely undermine, their scientific projects. Even if they
are not prevented from pursuing research itself, institutions may find
that the rights of other IP holders prevent them from commercializing
the fruits of their labor.

In biomedicine, there are considerable social costs associated with
working within this expensive proprietary system. These stem from the
fact that such costs are beyond the resources of the smallest
participants, or would-be participants, in the industry. Market forces
will naturally tend to direct efforts by big private sector players to
where there is the most substantial return on investment. This means
research goals are inevitably being narrowed to those that will be
most profitable, though not necessarily most useful. Thus, it is often
not commercially worthwhile for the biomedical industry to devote
significant resources to addressing medical or social needs, such as
drugs for very common diseases like tuberculosis or malaria.

Similarly, in agriculture, breeding strategies will be oriented
towards major crops in developed country markets, not towards finding
genetic traits with characteristics that are useful to poor farmers.
The last few years have also seen a series of mergers and acquisitions
that have dramatically consolidated the industry, with a huge portion
of fundamental research tools ending up in the hands of a tiny number
of big multinationals. This level of industry concentration has
inevitably led to the overpricing of technologies and the exclusion of
innovative start-ups and public sector institutions. This, in turn,
means that smaller firms can't get a foot in the door.

This situation has been described as a "tragedy of the anticommons."
In contrast to the tragedy of the commons, when a public resource is
overused because there is no one owner to regulate it, a tragedy of
the anticommons occurs when a resource is underused because it has
been divided up by a number of owners who may not be willing to agree
or cooperate with one another."

Can Open Source Licensing Work With Biotechnology? (still with Janet Hope)
"""
"When I spoke to Bruce Perens, who helped define the basis for open
source development in his aptly titled document, The Open Source
Definition, he took the view that the open source biotechnology
movement does not aim to create a particular legal framework. Instead,
it is a form of social engineering. There is no question that one
could produce a legally binding open source license in biotechnology
if one wanted to?the real question is whether anyone will use it.

The different proprietary regimes that prevail in the software and
biotechnology contexts are important to consider in answering this
question. Both software code and biotechnology innovations are
protected under a mixture of licensing systems , but the primary one
in software is copyright, whereas in biotechnology it is patents. The
cost of patent protection can be substantial, whereas copyright
protection arises automatically and without cost to the owner. Also,
patent fees are usually at least partly recovered from licensees under
the remuneration clauses in a proprietary license.

Second, standardized licenses appear to be important for keeping
transaction costs low in open source software, but this approach may
be less applicable outside a digital context. Biotechnology
innovations are far more diverse in terms of composition than
software, which is essentially non-physical and instantly
reproducible. Defining rights in living biological materials, given
their capacity for self-replication and mutation, is difficult.
Determining what constitutes an improvement to a licensed biological
technology is also challenging. This aspect would be especially
critical in open source applications. As stated earlier, open source
licenses generally require that improvements to the technology be made
available to the other users. Naturally, this is far more difficult
when the medium is biological matter, as opposed to digital
information.

To explore how open source might translate into the biotechnology
context, it is necessary to characterize it in terms of generalized
principles, as distinct from software-specific features. Although it
is becoming a popular subject of study for people in many disciplines,
no unifying principle has yet emerged as the dominant approach. I have
chosen to view open source development through the lens of a
relatively new theory from the field of innovation management, known
as User Innovation Theory
"""

For those of you who don't know Bruce:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Perens ?(do I have to remind anyone
that Wikipedia, itself, is licensed under the GFDL?)
"""
Bruce Perens is a computer programmer and advocate in the open source
community. He created the Open Source Definition and published the
first formal announcement and manifesto of open source.[1] He
co-founded the Open Source Initiative with Eric S. Raymond.[2] In
2005, Perens represented Open Source at the United Nations World
Summit on the Information Society, at the invitation of the United
Nations Development Program.[3] He has appeared before national
legislatures and is often quoted in the press, advocating for open
source and the reform of national and international technology policy.
"""

This part is also relevant:
http://rsss.anu.edu.au/~janeth/OSBiotech.html<http://rsss.anu.edu.au/%7Ejaneth/OSBiotech.html>
"""
In the end, the proof for the viability open source biotechnology is
not tied to the ultimate success of open source software. Open source
software is simply the basis for an analogy?the seed of an idea rather
than a rigid formula for success."
(http://www.gene-watch.org/genewatch/articles/18-1Hope.html)
"""

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Science_Licenses
http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_6/burk/index.html
"""
Copyleft?style licensing has also been applied to physical materials,
such as the biological materials made available via the Biological
Innovation for Open Society project or "BIOS" (Boettiger and Burk,
2004). The BIOS project is intended to make publicly available certain
biological research tools and techniques, and to attract contributions
of further research tools. While the project organizers are not
adverse to users of these tools filing patents on discoveries made by
use of the tools, the intention is to preserve public access to the
tools themselves. The danger to such access comes from patenting of
improvements or modifications that users might make to the basic
tools, encumbering the basic tools with proprietary claims.
Internet?based electronic resources offer information about the tools
and their use, and facilitate contact for physical transfer of the
tools, but physical access is conditioned on agreement not to patent
any improvements or modifications to the tools, and to make any such
modifications or improvements available on the same terms. No such
restrictions are placed upon products or discoveries generated by use
of the tools; such products or discoveries can be patented without
limitation.

However, it is critical to recognize that such application of the open
source copyleft model to research data and other resources
contemplates a different intellectual property system ? the patent
system ? than the copyright system in which the licensing scheme was
developed. This transfer of the open source "copyleft" model from the
legal regime of copyright to that of patent presents several
difficulties. As an initial matter, it is worth observing that the
"open source" designation is something of a misnomer in the patent
context. Patents require as a condition for the grant of exclusive
rights a disclosure of the invention sufficient to allow one of skill
to make and use the claimed invention. As a practical matter, this
disclosure for software this may not always include source code; for
biotechnology, the disclosure typically does include macromolecular
sequence data. But in either case, the disclosure requirements of
patenting should effectuate the goal of the "open source" movement to
publish the technical data necessary to allow tinkering, improvement,
and critique of the invention.

Thus, at least in theory, the patent system already entails a level of
disclosure sufficient to allow the sort of access for tinkering and
improvement envisioned by the open source and free software movement.
But as a practical matter, such tinkering and improvement of the
disclosed invention may be effectively precluded by the exclusive
rights conferred under the patent. As mentioned above, some
jurisdictions provide little or no room in the patent system for
experimental use or reverse engineering. And, even if the details of
an invention are already made accessible in the patent, the use of the
term "open source" in this context may rather signal a philosophical
commitment to "openness" or "free" science paralleling that of the
free software movement.

Transfer of the copyleft licensing model to the patent environment
also raises legal considerations not present in a copyright
environment (Boettiger and Burk, 2004; Feldman, 2005). First, the
nature of the exclusive rights ? granted by copyright and by patent ?
are quite different. Copyright excludes unauthorized copying and
related activities ? activities that are triggered by access to the
protected work. Such access serves as the trigger or activating event
for the copyleft license ? copying or adapting the open source code
opens the copyist or adapter to a lawsuit unless the copying or
adapting is done in accordance with the terms of the license. But
patent rights exclude all uses of the claimed invention, even those
conducted independently, without any access to the invention. In such
cases, the infringing act would not serve to channel the infringer
into compliance with the terms of the license, as there would be no
knowledge, let alone manifestation of assent, to the license.

Second, the restrictions on further patenting that are incorporated
into some "open biology" licenses may run afoul of the general public
policy of the patent system. In the United States particularly,
federal statutory and constitutional law encourages patenting, and
licenses deterring patents may be preempted. Additionally, and perhaps
more seriously, patents raise competition law considerations that are
not necessarily present under copyright law. Certain types of patent
licensing arrangements are subject to extra antitrust scrutiny, such
as patent "pools," in which participants cross license one another's
patents, patent "grant?backs," which require licensing of technology
developed with a patented tool back to the patent owner, and patent
"reach?through," which requires payment of royalties to a patent owner
for products developed with a patented tool. Patenting restrictions in
open biology licenses resemble these types of arrangement ? for
example, requiring products developed with "open source" biology tools
to be licensed back to others on an "open source" basis ? and so may
raise antitrust concerns.

But the greatest obstacle to movement of "copyleft" licenses into
electronic research collaborations may be the social disparity between
the licenses' original open source milieu and that of scientific
research settings (Burk, 2005a). There are marked differences in the
organizational and institutional networks of each community. Despite
the some apparent congruence between the normative expectations in
each community, academic science as currently practiced, particularly
in industrialized nations, has a different and far more complicated
profile than that of the open source community. The scientific
community is older and more institutionally invested, with a decided
organizational structure not present in open source coding.

Despite its profession of "openness," academic science has an
effectively hierarchical organization at the level of individual
laboratories, as well as at the level of professional association.

Graduate and undergraduate training in the sciences also contributes a
distinct social sub?structure to the scientific community.
Additionally, academic science is heavily subsidized by governmental
grants, with the result that funding agencies may have interests and
involvement in the disposition of intellectual property, both at the
level of formal agency objectives and in the biases or preferences of
peer review committees. Other formal institutions, such as
institutional ethics review boards, university technology transfer
offices, and peer?review journal publishers may also play roles not
contemplated by the open source licensing system.

Such normative considerations may complicate the development of
licenses that would ameliorate the legal conflicts issues in
cyberinfrastructure. The success of the copyleft model in software
development is due in no small part to strong buttressing of the
license by the normative expectations of the community. In the broader
scientific context, it is unclear whether the license will have the
same status, the same social meaning, and the same success in a
different community setting.
"""

How likely is it that pharmaceutical companies would go open source?
http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Biotechnology#How_likely_is_it_t...<http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Biotechnology#How_likely_is_it_that_pharmaceutical_companies_would_go_open_source.3F>
"""
2. Established business practice: Pharmaceutical companies rely
heavily on patent positions - whether or not they have a patent on a
particular pharmaceutical product makes a big difference both to the
results of their operations in terms of the economics of selling
drugs, and to the company's valuation on the stock market; and this
translates into a big emphasis on IP, to a degree even in areas that
aren't really related to their proprietary position on their drug
products. In other words, not sharing IP is deeply ingrained. To a
large degree the biotech industry has inherited that culture of not
sharing. The costs of changing established business practice are very
real in terms of organisational structure and providing incentives for
your employees to shift the way they look at things - and so there is
plenty of inertia for large, established companies like the big pharma
companies when it comes to adopting fundamentally new business models
like open source.
"""

"""
1. One established use of open source business strategies in the
software context is to pre-empt the establishment of proprietary
technological standards owned by your rivals. Even though
pharmaceutical companies hate sharing, one thing they hate even more
is being beholden to a single supplier for some critical value driver.
This means they might be prepared to put money into an open source
biotech company that planned to come up with a really critical tool --
say a toxicology tool that would help predict R&D failures before a
drug hit the expensive clinical phase of development. This is a
significant example because currently, exclusive patent positions are
important to biotech start-ups largely as a way to attract capital. So
this kind of support would provide a credible alternative story for
biotech start-ups to tell potential investors and thus could promote
the development of open source strategies in the biotechnology sector.
"""

There's also a quote from Rob Carlson on that page--
http://synthesis.typepad.com/synthesis/2007/03/thoughts_on_ope.html
"""
When I first heard Drew Endy utter the phrase "Open Source Biology",
it was within the broader context of living in Berkeley, trying to
understand the future of biology as technology, and working in an
environment (the then embryonic Molecular Sciences Institute) that
encouraged thinking anything was possible. It was also within the
context of Microsoft's domination of the OS market, the general
technology boom in the San Francisco Bay area, the skyrocketing cost
of drug development coupled to a stagnation of investment return on
those dollars, and the obvious gap in our capabilities in designing
and building biological systems. OSB seemed the right strategy to get
to where I thought we ought to be in the future, which is to create
the ability to tinker effectively, perhaps someday even to engineer
biology, and to employ biology as technology for solving some of the
many problems humans face, and that humans have created.

As in 2000, I remain today most interested in maintaining, and
enhancing, the ability to innovate. In particular, I feel that safe
and secure innovation is likely to be best achieved through
distributed research and through distributed biological manufacturing.
By "Open Biology" I mean access to the tools and skills necessary to
participate in that innovation and distributed economy.

"Open source biology" and "open source biotechnology" are catchy
phrases, but they have little if any content for the moment. As
various non-profits get up and running (e.g., CAMBIA and the BioBrick
Foundation), some of the vagaries will be defined, and at least we
will have some structure to talk about and test in the real world.
When there is a real license a la the GPL, or the Lesser License, and
when it is finally tested in court we will have some sense of how this
will all work out.

I am by no means saying work should stop on OSB, or on figuring out
the licenses, just that I don't understand how it fits into helping
innovation at the moment. A great deal of the innovation we need to
see will not come from academia or existing corporations, but from
people noodling around in their garages or in start-ups yet to be
founded. These are the customers for Biobricks, these are the people
who want the ability to build biological systems without needing an
NIH grant."
"""

Of course, the Biobrick Foundation, iGEM, OpenWetWare, diybio and
other related initiatives have been seeing great growth since Rob
wrote that, so things are changing. :-) And for the agricultural side
of things, check this out:

"Researchers in Australia have devised a method of creating
genetically modified crops that does not infringe on patents held by
big biotechnology companies. The technique will be made available free
to others to use and improve, as long as any improvements are also
available free."
(http://business-times.asia1.com.sg/sub/views/story/0,4574,144880,00.html)

Open Source Biotechnology, from The Economist
http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=2724420
"""
open-source approaches have emerged in biotechnology already. The
international effort to sequence the human genome, for instance,
resembled an open-source initiative. It placed all the resulting data
into the public domain rather than allow any participant to patent any
of the results. Open source is also flourishing in bioinformatics, the
field in which biology meets information technology. This involves
performing biological research using supercomputers rather than
test-tubes. Within the bioinformatics community, software code and
databases are often swapped on "you share, I share" terms, for the
greater good of all. Evidently the open-source approach works in
biological-research tools and pre-competitive platform technologies.
The question now is whether it will work further downstream, closer to
the patient, where the development costs are greater and the potential
benefits more direct. Open-source research could indeed, it seems,
open up two areas in particular. The first is that of non-patentable
compounds and drugs whose patents have expired. These receive very
little attention from researchers, because there would be no way to
protect (and so profit from) any discovery that was made about their
effectiveness. To give an oft-quoted example, if aspirin cured cancer,
no company would bother to do the trials to prove it, or go through
the rigmarole of regulatory approval, since it could not patent the
discovery. (In fact, it might be possible to apply for a process
patent that covers a new method of treatment, but the broader point
still stands.) Lots of potentially useful drugs could be sitting under
researchers' noses.

The second area where open source might be able to help would be in
developing treatments for diseases that afflict small numbers of
people, such as Parkinson's disease, or are found mainly in poor
countries, such as malaria. In such cases, there simply is not a large
enough market of paying customers to justify the enormous expense of
developing a new drug. America's Orphan Drug Act, which provides
financial incentives to develop drugs for small numbers of patients,
is one approach. But there is still plenty of room for
improvement?which is where the open-source approach might have a
valuable role to play.
"""

Open Bioinformatics Foundation
http://www.open-bio.org/
"""
The Open Bioinformatics Foundation is a non profit, volunteer run
organization focused on supporting open source programming in
bioinformatics. The foundation grew out of the volunteer projects
BioPerl, BioJava and BioPython and was formally incorporated in order
to handle our modest requirements of hardware ownership, domain name
management and funding for conferences and workshops.The Foundation
does not participate directly in the development or structure of the
open source work, but as the members of the foundation are drawn from
the member projects, there is clear commonality of direction and
purpose. Occasionally the O|B|F directors may make announcements about
our direction or purpose (a recent one was on the licensing of
academic software) when the board feels there is a need to clarify
matters, but in general we prefer to remain simply the administrative
support organization for our member projects.

Our main activities are:
Underwriting and supporting the BOSC conferences
Organizing and supporting developer-centric "hackathon" events
Managing our servers, colocation facilities, bank account & other assets
"""

Next up on the list is about open source biology, a big topic that we
last talked about at BioBarCamp 2008:

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Biology
which contains a bit of a story of Drew and Rob's involvement from
which I'm excerpting:

"Since we ourselves depend on the information encoded in genetic
material," Endy explains, "we should work together to share genetic
information."

http://www.eastbayexpress.com/2005-03-30/news/steal-this-genome/
"""
They also made a plea on behalf of public safety; there's no way any
federal law can ensure that someone doesn't create an organism that,
as Brent puts it, "liquefies Cincinnati." Rather than trying to keep
secret, for example, the genome of a potential bioterror agent, the
institute crew concluded that it's better to empower as many people as
possible to develop countermeasures such as new drugs and vaccines.
"Consider that the only effective counterterrorism measures on
September 11, 2001 were made by the passengers of Flight 93," Brent
says.

Carlson, Endy, and Brent all agree that the best way to keep tabs on
the potential dangers brewing in labs was to share information. "The
only way the shit doesn't hit the fan is if everybody engineering
biology does so in the open," Endy says. "We're co-opting the idea
from open-source software that 'many eyes lead to few bugs.' In other
words, I don't trust you not to make any mistakes the next time you
program a piece of DNA. You shouldn't trust me."
"""

Rob still contrasting on parallels (or lack thereof) between
biological freedom and software freedom:
http://web.archive.org/web/20010412011122/http://www.intentionalbiolo...<http://web.archive.org/web/20010412011122/http://www.intentionalbiology.org/osb.html>

"What does 'ownership' mean when property is infinitely reduplicable,
highly malleable, and the surrounding culture has neither coercive
power relationships nor material scarcity economics?" -Eric S Raymond,
Homesteading the Noosphere.

"""
The biohacker community will emerge as DNA manipulation technology
decreases in cost and when the overall technological infrastructure
enables instruments to be assembled in the garage. The Molecular
Sciences Institute has a parallel DNA synthesizer that can synthesize
sufficient DNA to build a human pathogenic virus from scratch in about
a week. Assembled, this machine cost ~$100,000 about 18 months ago. We
estimate the parts could be purchased for ~$10,000 today. A working
DNA synthesizer could be built with relative ease. Synthesizers of
this sort produce ~50 mers, and it is likely that methods to assemble
these short oligos into chromosomes will be perfected relaltively
soon. Hobbyists often spent similar sums on cars, motocycles,
computers, and aquariums. <snip>

It is not that we expect (or desire) open-source biology to share the
various shades of anti-commercial bent which exist in the software
community, but rather that the future of a likely distributed
biological research effort implies significant changes in the way we
view commercial efforts. Rather than send samples through the mail,
sequences will be transferred electronically between researchers and
directly into DNA synthesizers. Biological manufacturing will be
everywhere, making irrelevant standard notions of centralized
production, and the real economy will be of design and infrastructure.
(v.01, Rob Carlson Copyright 2000, 12/10/2000) <snip>

One aspect of hacker culture that is highly relevant to Open-Source
Biology is the general disapproval of "hoarding." The concentration
and segregation of technology and standards by particular actors
(companies, in this instance) is viewed as simply greedy and as
retarding the development and acceptance of improved technology.

The explicit goal of companies is, of course, to make money. However,
when it comes to a technology that can directly influence the
organisms that humans rely on for food and shelter there should be
great concern in the concentration of power by any given organization.
Moreover, the intervening period between when we can genetically alter
organisms and the time when we know what we are doing and can fix
mistakes (that time period is right now) should be made as short as
possible. We should move with all haste to ensure that biological
technology moves as rapidly as possible and is disseminated as widely
as possible.

In Homesteading the Noosphere, Eric Raymond makes the interesting
point that the cracker culture maintains itself in a very different
fashion than the hacker culture, and develops differently as a result.
In the cracker culture, process and programming knowledge is closely
guarded, and Raymond suggests that this impedes the growth of
knowledge. In contrast, "in the hacker community, one's work is one's
statement. The best craftsmanship wins. Thus, the hacker culture's
knowledge base increases rapidly." In other words, the cracker culture
condones a form of 'hoarding' and knowledge disperses slowly as a
result. It is clear that the hacker community is a far better model
for those interested in moving biology forward as quickly as possible.
(v.01, Rob Carlson Copyright 2000, 12/10/2000)
"""

Open Source Drug Discovery program (officially mandated by the govt.
of India, ~$34 million USD)
http://osdd.org/
http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Drug_Discovery

There's enough news links from the osdd.org front page to get a feel
for their Tuberculosis-oriented program. OSDD is very recent and very
big news for the pharmaceutical sector, I've joined and been
contributing and there's been talk with the manufacturing guys about
how to implement some of the tech they've been thinking up.

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Biology
http://www.forbes.com/2007/02/12/novartis-genes-diabetes-research-biz...<http://www.forbes.com/2007/02/12/novartis-genes-diabetes-research-biz-cz_mh_0212novartis.html>
"""
There was a time when drug giants tried to keep leads like that to
themselves in an attempt to gain an advantage over their competitors.
They paid lots of money for the privilege, too. In 1993,
GlaxoSmithKline tied up with Human Genome Sciences to develop drugs
based on genome data. Five years later, Bayer spent $465 million to
get access to the genetic library being assembled by Millennium
Pharmaceuticals. Neither collaboration has led to a marketed drug. But
another requirement of making the leap from genes to drugs is making
the research public--a step that will make it difficult for
researchers elsewhere to patent any of this raw genetic information.
Novartis isn't the only drug firm embracing this "give it away for
free" mentality. Pfizer has promised to make available for free a
swath of genetic information emerging from a three-year collaboration
with the National Institutes of Health."

Also: Open Source methods are increasingly being used as a mechanism
to organise drug discovery. Examples include the Medicines for Malaria
Venture (MMV), the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development (TB
Alliance) and the Institute of One World Health (IOWH).
"""

"""
Robb Carlson argues that since the cost of biological production is
going down, and the risks of unintentional spreading of pathogens is
going to increase, then only further openness can work as security
strategy, as has already been demonstrated in the fruitless attempts
to curtain P2P Filesharing.
"""

On security:
http://www.kurzweilai.net/meme/frame.html?main=/articles/art0614.html?
?(Kurzweil wrote "The Singularity is Near")
"""
The real threat from distributed biological technologies lies neither
in their development nor use, per se, but rather that biological
systems may be the subject of accidental or intentional modification
without the knowledge of those who might be harmed. Because this may
include significant human, animal, or plant populations, it behooves
us to maximize our knowledge about what sort of experimentation is
taking place around the world. Unfortunately (though understandably),
the first response to incidents such as the anthrax attacks in the
fall of 2001 is to attempt to improve public safety through means that
paradoxically often limit our capabilities to gather such information.

Some view as an immediate threat the proliferation of technologies
useful in manipulating biological systems: Passionate arguments are
being made that research should be slowed and that some research
should be avoided altogether. "Letting the genie out of the bottle" is
a ubiquitous concern, one that has been loudly voiced in other fields
over the years and is meant to set off alarm bells about biological
research.

A favorite rhetorical device in this discussion is the comparison of
nuclear technologies with biological technologies. Success in limiting
the development and spread of nuclear technologies is taken to mean
similar feats are possible with biological technologies. But this sort
of argument fails to consider the logistical, let alone ethical,
differences between embargoing raw fissionable materials used in
nuclear or radiological weapons and embargoing biological technology
or even biology itself.

Regulation of the development of nuclear weapons has been successful
only because access to raw fissionable materials has, fortunately,
been relatively easy to restrict. However, both the knowledge and
tools necessary to construct rudimentary weapons have for decades been
highly distributed. It is arguable that, with some effort,
construction of a rudimentary nuclear device is within the
capabilities of most physics and engineering college graduates who
have access to a basic machine shop. Building nuclear devices is thus
theoretically quite feasible but physically difficult, even for the
knowledgeable, because the raw materials are simply not available. Yet
the raw stuff of biology has always been readily at hand, and our
schools and industries are now equipping students with the skills to
manipulate biological systems through powerful and distributed
technology. Because skills are already widespread and will only become
more so, altering and reverse engineering biological systems will
become both easier and more common. Regulation can do little to alter
this trend.

If strict regulation held promise of real protection, it would be well
worth considering. But regulation is inherently leaky, and it is more
often a form of management than blanket prohibition. Certainly no
category of crime has ever been eliminated through legal prohibition.
In this light, we must ask how many infringements of potential
regulation of biological technologies we are willing to risk. Further,
will the threat of sanctions such as imprisonment ever be enough to
dissuade infringement? Given the potential damage wrought by misuses
of the technology, we may never be satisfied that such sanctions would
constitute a repayment of debt to society, the fundamental tenet of
our criminal justice system. The damages may always exceed any
punishment meted out to those deemed criminal. These considerations
come down to how we choose to balance the risks and consequences of
infringement against whatever safety may be found in regulation and
attempts at enforcement. More important than this tenuous safety,
however, is the potential danger of enforced ignorance. In the end, we
must decide not whether we are willing to risk damages caused by
biological technology, but whether limiting the general direction of
biological research in the coming years will enable us to deal with
the outcome of mischief or mistake. We must decide if we are willing
to take the risk of being unprepared.

There are currently calls to limit research in the United States on
the basic biology of many pathogens to preempt their use as
bioweapons,22 and the possession and transport of many pathogens was
legislated into criminality by the Patriot Act.23 The main difficulty
with this approach is not that it assumes the basic biology of
pathogens is static?which because of either natural variation or human
intervention it is not?but rather that it assumes we have already
catalogued all possible natural pathogens, that we already know how to
detect and defeat known and unknown pathogens, and that rogue elements
will not be able to learn how to manipulate pathogens and toxins on
their own. These assumptions are demonstrably false. Pathogens ranging
from HIV to M. tuberculosis to P. falciparum (which causes malaria)
have successfully evolved to escape formerly effective treatments. New
human pathogens are constantly emerging, which as in the case of SARS
might be identified quickly but require much longer to develop
treatments against. In the last century governments and independent
organizations alike have developed and used biological weapons.
Restricting our own research will merely leave us less prepared for
the inevitable emergence of new natural and artificial biological
threats. Moreover, it is naive to think we can successfully limit
access to existing pertinent information within our current economic
and political framework.

As is clear from recent efforts to limit peer-to-peer file sharing on
the Internet, in today's environment strict prohibition of information
flow can only be achieved by quarantine?unplugging wires and blocking
wireless transmission. Thwarted by the difficulty of such endeavors,
music conglomerates have resorted to flooding file servers with
corrupted files (camouflage),24 and requesting the legal authority to
engage in preemptive cracking of file trader's computers (sabotage).25

Neither strategy is likely to be a long term solution of controlling
information for the music industry, and similar efforts to regulate
biological technologies are bound to be more difficult still.
Attempting to maintain control of information and instrumentation will
be a futile task in light of the increasingly sophisticated biological
technologies blossoming around the world."
"""

Rob Carlson on what needs to be done for a secure open biology approach
"""
We should focus on three challenges:
1) We should resist the impulse to restrict research and the flow of
information. Ignorance will help no one in the event of an emergent
threat and, given the pace and proliferation of biological
technologies, the likelihood of threats will increase in coming years.
Among the greatest threats we face is that potentially detrimental
work will proceed while we sit on our hands. If we are not ourselves
pushing the boundaries of what is known about how pathogens work or
ways to manipulate them, we are by definition at a disadvantage. Put
simply, it will be much easier to keep track of what is in the wind if
we don't have our heads in the sand.

2) The best way to keep apprised of the activities of both amateurs
and professionals is to establish open networks of researchers,
perhaps modeled on the Open Source Software (OSS) movement, and
potentially sponsored by the government during their embryonic phases.
The Open Source development community thrives on constant
communication and plentiful free advice. This behavior is common
practice for professional biology hackers, and it is already evident
on the Web amongst amateur biology hackers.14 This represents an
opportunity to keep apprised of current research in a distributed
fashion. Anyone trying something new will require advice from peers
and may advertise at least some portion of the results of their work.
As is evident from the ready criticism leveled at miscreants in online
forums frequented by software developers (Slashdot, Kuro5hin, etc.),
people are not afraid to speak out when they feel the work of a
particular person or group is substandard or threatens the public
good. Thus our best potential defense against biological threats is to
create and maintain open networks of researchers at every level,
thereby magnifying the number of eyes and ears keeping track of what
is going on in the world.

3) Because human intelligence gathering is, alas, demonstrably
inadequate for the task at hand, we should develop technology that
enables pervasive environmental monitoring. The best way to detect
biological threats is using biology itself, in the form of genetically
modified organisms. Unlike the production and deployment of chemical
weapons or fissile materials, which can often be monitored with remote
sensing technologies such as aerial and satellite reconnaissance, the
initial indication of biological threats may be only a few cells or
molecules. This small quantity may already be a lethal dose and can be
very hard to detect using physical means. Alternatively, "surveillance
bugs" distributed in the environment could transduce small amounts of
cells or molecules into signals measurable by remote sensing. The
organisms might be modified to reproduce in the presence of certain
signals, to change their schooling or flocking behavior, or to alter
their physical appearance. Candidate "detector platforms" span the
range of bacteria, insects, plants, and animals. Transgenic
zebrafish34 and nematodes35 have already been produced for this
purpose, and there is some progress in producing a generalized system
for detecting arbitrary molecules using signal transduction pathways
in bacteria.

None of these recommended goals will be trivial to accomplish.
Considerable sums have already been spent over the last five decades
to understand biological systems at the molecular level, much of this
in the name of defeating infectious disease. While this effort has
produced considerable advances in diagnosing and treating disease, we
should now redouble our efforts. We have entered an era when the
ability to modify biological systems is becoming widespread in the
absence of an attendant ability to remediate potential mistakes or
mischief. Maintaining safety and security in this context will require
concerted effort, and an immediate, focused governmental R&D
investment would be a good start. Although "bug to drug in twenty four
hours" sounds much flashier than "bug to drug in six to eight weeks,"
the latter is the more realistic timeline to shoot for?even if it is a
decade or more away?and this goal may serve as an organizational focus
for an endeavor organized and sponsored by the government.
"""

Some related links:
http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/Open-Biology
http://www.bios.net/daisy/bios/15
http://www.wired.com/news/medtech/0,1286,66545,00.html
http://www.wired.com/news/medtech/0,1286,66289,00.html
http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/002893.html
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/rai.pdf (Open and Collaborative
Biomedical Research: Theory and Evidence, Rai Arti.)
and then all of the wonderful open access journals :-) like
http://biomedcentral.com/home/ and PLoS Biology etc.

Then there's also the issue of genomics:

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Genomics
http://genomics.org/ and the $0 Genomics Project, plus lots of other tools
http://polonator.org/
"""
To usher in the dawn of truly personalized medicine, and accurately
tease apart the confluence of factors determining human pathology, it
will be necessary (albeit not sufficient) that large numbers of
reliable, high-throughput second-generation sequencers be installed
and operated. We have identified the upfront and recurring cost of
second-generation sequencing as key factors inhibiting their rate of
adoption, and have assiduously sought to drive these as low as
possible. At the same time, throughput, accuracy, and reliability have
been the focus of relentless development efforts.

A key differentiator in our approach to second-generation sequencing
is our embrace of a flexible, open source development model. The
system's operating software is fully documented and freely available
for public download, as are the protocols and reagent sets. All
aspects of the system are fully programmable, with parameters and
sequences accessible and modifiable by its users to improve and extend
the instrument. In addition, all subsystems are highly modular and
easily upgraded and/or retrofitted; as a result, we fully anticipate
that the instrument will evolve and improve over time. We expect a
worldwide user community to develop and flourish, advancing both the
design and the operational specifics of the platform, from which all
users in turn will benefit.
"""

Implications on health reform:
http://www.designcouncil.info/mt/RED/health/
http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Health

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Notebook_Science
http://drexel-coas-elearning.blogspot.com/2006/09/open-notebook-scien...<http://drexel-coas-elearning.blogspot.com/2006/09/open-notebook-science.html>
"""
To clear up confusion, I will use the term Open Notebook Science,
which has not yet suffered meme mutation. By this I mean that there is
a URL to a laboratory notebook (like this) that is freely available
and indexed on common search engines. It does not necessarily have to
look like a paper notebook but it is essential that all of the
information available to the researchers to make their conclusions is
equally available to the rest of the world. Basically, no insider
information.
"""
IIRC, openwetware.org includes some "open notebooks" on the wiki from
iGEM participants and other research teams.

Also, open access research has been hitting a high note recently.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access
"""
Open access (OA) or open access publishing is the publication of
material in such a way that it is available to all potential users
without financial or other barriers. An open access publisher is a
publisher producing such material. Many types of material can be
published in this manner: scholarly journals, known specifically as
open access journals, magazines and newsletters, e-text or other
e-books (whether scholarly, literary, or recreational), music, fine
arts, or any product of intellectual activity. In this context,
non-open access distribution is called "toll access" or "subscription
access".
"""

Also in the news, NIH has been going open access:
http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=07/12/27/0219228
http://science.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=07/11/07/2318208
http://science.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/08/06/1225211&tid=134&t...<http://science.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/08/06/1225211&tid=134&tid=103>
http://yro.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=07/03/02/0158208

PLoS is a life-saver, and so are the many, many other open access
preprint archives available through the web. Everyone on this list is
probably familiar with pubmedcentral, or pubget.com, and in general
see these lists-
http://heybryan.org/mediawiki/index.php/List_of_bioinformatics_databases
http://web.archive.org/web/20020206160321/http://gwu.edu/~gprice/scie...<http://web.archive.org/web/20020206160321/http://gwu.edu/%7Egprice/science.htm>
http://www.freepint.com/gary/direct.htm
http://slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=239163&cid=19595767
.. there are many, many databases that I have been unable to recall
and cite all at once, so if anyone ever needs to find a paper or look
up some piece of information, there's more open access and free
databases than I can recall, and the proprietary stuff is also
available to almost anybody with a community college library
subscription or otherwise a university enrollment/faculty status.

http://p2pfoundation.net/Openness_in_Science
http://blog.openwetware.org/scienceintheopen/2008/09/30/a-personal-vi...<http://blog.openwetware.org/scienceintheopen/2008/09/30/a-personal-view-of-open-science-part-i/>
""" (summarizing)
1. Science is traditionally an open endeavour
2. The internet/web potentially increases the openness
3. This potential is under-used
4. An advocacy movement is needed
"""

So, now for some licensing stuff. For the run down on GNU, the free
software movement, open source licenses, then there's an excellent
video that has been produced called "Revolution OS" and it's available
on Google Video:
http://video.google.com/videosearch?q=revolution+os&emb=0#
(w/ Richard Stallman (RMS), Eric S Raymond (ESR), Linus Torvalds,
Bruce Perens, ...)

http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Licenses

http://creativecommons.org/
http://sciencecommons.org/
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Science_Commons

"Creative Commons provides free tools that let authors, scientists,
artists, and educators easily mark their creative work with the
freedoms they want it to carry. You can use CC to change your
copyright terms from "All Rights Reserved" to "Some Rights Reserved."
We're a nonprofit organization. Everything we do ? including the
software we create ? is free."

"Science Commons designs strategies and tools for faster, more
efficient web-enabled scientific research. We identify unnecessary
barriers to research, craft policy guidelines and legal agreements to
lower those barriers, and develop technology to make research, data
and materials easier to find and use. Our goal is to speed the
translation of data into discovery ? unlocking the value of research
so more people can benefit from the work scientists are doing."

Quick video on Science Commons:
http://sciencecommons.org/about/science-commons-dylan-video/
And again the "Revolution OS" video:
http://video.google.com/videosearch?q=revolution+os&emb=0#
And there are many more of interest on http://ted.com/ (and its little
(free) brother: http://bilconference.com/ )

And then there's the open manufacturing group that has been exploring
some of these issues, like biotech, but also in terms of machine
shops, kinematic self-replicating machines, advanced automation, etc.,
in terms of open source hardware and shared design initiatives:
http://openmanufacturing.net/
http://groups.google.com/group/openmanufacturing
http://p2pfoundation.net/Product_Hacking for a list of many open
hardware projects. A quick glance shows that there are vehicles,
microprocessors, DNA synthesizers, most of everything from the Maker
community, instructables, etc.

Open Design Foundation
http://www.opendesign.org/
"The mission of the Open Design Foundation is to promote an
alternative method for designing and developing technology, based on
the free exchange of comprehensive design information. The Open Design
Foundation provides the collaborative space to foster open source
physical design, and seeks to strike a balance between the
independence of individual designers and the collective power of
collaboration. The Open Design Foundation hopes that this method will
enable and promote design projects, which are motivated by personal
conviction and passion of designers for the greater benefit of a
global society."

Debian Social Contract
http://www.debian.org/social_contract
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debian_Social_Contract

Ubuntu Code of Conduct
http://www.ubuntu.com/community/conduct

"""
Ubuntu is an African concept of 'humanity towards others'. It is 'the
belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity'. The
same ideas are central to the way the Ubuntu community collaborates.
Members of the Ubuntu community need to work together effectively, and
this code of conduct lays down the "ground rules" for our cooperation.

We chose the name Ubuntu for our distribution because we think it
captures perfectly the spirit of the sharing and cooperation that is
at the heart of the open source movement. In the Free Software world,
we collaborate freely on a volunteer basis to build software for
everyone's benefit. We improve on the work of others, which we have
been given freely, and then share our improvements on the same basis.

That collaboration depends on good relationships between developers.
To this end, we've agreed on the following code of conduct to help
define the ways that we think collaboration and cooperation should
work.

If you wish to sign the code of conduct, you can sign the canonical copy
online.
"""

Open Source Definition
http://www.opensource.org/docs/definition.php

Summarized, the "open source definition" is generally:
"""
1. Free Redistribution
2. Source Code [how it's done]
3. Derived Works
4. Integrity of The Author's Source Code
5. No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups
6. No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor
7. Distribution of License
8. License Must Not Be Specific to a Product
9. License Must Not Restrict Other Software
10. License Must Be Technology-Neutral
"""

Another good book to read on these subjects is Two Bits:
http://twobits.net/about/
"In Two Bits, Christopher M. Kelty investigates the history and
cultural significance of Free Software, revealing the people and
practices that have transformed not only software, but also music,
film, science, and education."
and: "Free Software is a set of practices devoted to the collaborative
creation of software source code that is made openly and freely
available through an unconventional use of copyright law. Kelty shows
how these specific practices have reoriented the relations of power
around the creation, dissemination, and authorization of all kinds of
knowledge after the arrival of the Internet. Two Bits also makes an
important contribution to discussions of public spheres and social
imaginaries by demonstrating how Free Software is a "recursive public"
public organized around the ability to build, modify, and maintain the
very infrastructure that gives it life in the first place."

Alright, that feels like enough for at least one book to elaborate on,
so is probably a good stopping point. And to think that I haven't
included any sources explaining the importance of debian ("$10 billion
worth of work" - for free - over 20,000 free software packages,
apt-get, repositories, etc.), or works like Andreas Lloyd's
anthropological exploration into the ubuntu user community.
- Bryan
http://heybryan.org/
1 512 203 0507

--
The P2P Foundation researches, documents and promotes peer to peer
alternatives.

Wiki and Encyclopedia, at http://p2pfoundation.net; Blog, at
http://blog.p2pfoundation.net; Newsletter, at
http://integralvisioning.org/index.php?topic=p2p

Basic essay at http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499; interview at
http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/09/p2p-very-core-of-world-to-come.html
BEST VIDEO ON P2P:
http://video.google.com.au/videoplay?docid=4549818267592301968&hl=en-AU

KEEP UP TO DATE through our Delicious tags at http://del.icio.us/mbauwens

The work of the P2P Foundation is supported by SHIFTN,
http://www.shiftn.com/


From rufus.pollock at okfn.org  Wed Mar 11 09:28:26 2009
From: rufus.pollock at okfn.org (Rufus Pollock)
Date: Wed, 11 Mar 2009 09:28:26 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Draft Open Database License Available for Comments
Message-ID: <b68e90820903110228h7646c21en261bb0414b04bc20@mail.gmail.com>

[Apologies for cross-posting]

After more than a year of drafting and consultation with interested
communities, especially Open Street Map, Open Data Commons has
recently released for public comments a beta draft of its
("Attribution, Share-Alike") Open Database License (ODbL):

  <http://www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/>

The current provisional deadline for comments is 23:59 GMT on 20 March 2009.

Details on how to submit comments are given on the ODbL license page
given above.

Regards,

Rufus


From yishaym at gmail.com  Thu Mar 12 01:50:45 2009
From: yishaym at gmail.com (Yishay Mor)
Date: Thu, 12 Mar 2009 01:50:45 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Grant Funding Call 03/09: Rapid Innovation Grants
Message-ID: <e5fbfda10903111850y4ccb224en9e6e1be7527bc567@mail.gmail.com>

http://jisc.ac.uk/fundingopportunities/funding_calls/2009/03/309ricall
Grant Funding Call 03/09: Rapid Innovation Grants

Submission Deadline: 22 April 2009 12:00

Committees: JISC Integrated Information Environment
committee<http://jisc.ac.uk/aboutus/committees/subcommittees/jiie.aspx>
1

JISC invites institutions to submit funding proposals for grants to fund
technical rapid innovation projects addressing priority areas.

Proposals are sought under the following priority areas:

   - Mashups of open data
   - Aggregating tags and feeds
   - Semantic web/ linked data
   - Data search
   - Visualisation
   - Personalisation
   - Mobile Technologies
   - Lightweight Shared Infrastructure Services
   - User Interface Design

Funding of between ?15,000 - ?40,000 for 6 month projects for up to 30
projects is available

The deadline for receipt of proposals in response to this call is *12 noon
on Wednesday 22 April 2009*.

Funding is available for projects starting in early-mid June 2009 for 6
months. All projects must be complete by 30 November 2009.

Further information can be found in the full Call below.

___________________________
 Yishay Mor, Researcher, London Knowledge Lab
  http://www.lkl.ac.uk/people/mor.html
  http://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=yishaym%40gmail.com
  +44-20-78378888 x5737
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090312/8e65b716/attachment.htm 

From yishaym at gmail.com  Thu Mar 12 10:14:15 2009
From: yishaym at gmail.com (Yishay Mor)
Date: Thu, 12 Mar 2009 10:14:15 +0000
Subject: [open-science] last places: Design Patterns for civic empowerment,
	March 17th, London Knowledge Lab
Message-ID: <e5fbfda10903120314l4bc26dc7q5bc2878f4238fcd1@mail.gmail.com>

Design Patterns for civic empowerment

 A joint workshop of the Pattern Language
Network<http://projects.lkl.ac.uk/planet>,
the Public Sphere Project <http://www.publicsphereproject.org/>, and PRADSA
network <http://www.technologyandsocialaction.org/>

*Date*: 17th March, 2009 *Location*: London Knowledge
Lab<http://lkl.ac.uk/contact>
*Registration*: http://socialactionpatterns.eventbrite.com/ *details*:
http://purl.org/planet/Groups.SocialAction/

For the last seven years, the public sphere
project<http://www.publicsphereproject.org/patterns/>has been
developing the Liberating Voices pattern language, which aims to
help people think about, design, develop, manage and use information and
communication systems that more fully meet human needs now ? and in the
future. Each pattern in this language, when complete, will represent an
important insight that will help contribute to a communication revolution.
A book that contains the first version of the Liberating Voices pattern
language is now available from MIT
Press<http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11601>.

To celebrate the release of this book, we will be running a pattern workshop
on the theme of civic empowerment and social action. This workshop will
follow the methodology<http://patternlanguagenetwork.myxwiki.org/xwiki/bin/view/Outcomes/Methodology>developed
by the Planet project, and refined through a long series of
events.

This workshop will bring together social and technology activists to explore
the opportunities and challenges that participatory media bring to social
action and civic empowerment. It will provide participants an invaluable
opportunity to share their experiences and collaboratively reflect on them,
highlighting common problems and possible solutions.

___________________________
 Yishay Mor, Researcher, London Knowledge Lab
  http://www.lkl.ac.uk/people/mor.html
  http://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=yishaym%40gmail.com
  +44-20-78378888 x5737
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090312/276c734c/attachment.htm 

From jonathan.gray at okfn.org  Sat Mar 14 09:30:13 2009
From: jonathan.gray at okfn.org (Jonathan Gray)
Date: Sat, 14 Mar 2009 10:30:13 +0100
Subject: [open-science] Launch of new Working Group on Open Data in Science
Message-ID: <54ca21750903140230p912b393mc8d3b98e122f28cf@mail.gmail.com>

Hi all,

We are pleased to announce the launch of a new Working Group on Open
Data in Science. In the first instance, the group will aim to:

  1. Act as a central point of reference and support for people who
think they are interested in open data in science.
  2. Identify practices of early adopters, collecting data and
developing guides.
  3. Act as a hub for the development of low cost, community driven
projects around open data in science.

We are currently working on:

  * a prize for open data in science
  * a service to request that a given dataset to be made open or to
request clarification about whether or not it can be re-used
  * case studies on the benefits of open data in different domains

Further details can be found at:

  http://okfn.org/wiki/wg/science
  http://blog.okfn.org/2009/03/13/working-group-on-open-data-in-science/

-- 
Jonathan Gray

Community Coordinator
The Open Knowledge Foundation
http://www.okfn.org


From gavin at gavinbaker.com  Mon Mar 16 06:00:26 2009
From: gavin at gavinbaker.com (Gavin Baker)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 02:00:26 -0400
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
Message-ID: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>

is the title of a post just published on my blog:
http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/

I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
discussion:

> I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> post falls in that category.
> 
> Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> repository.
> 
> This seems a bit odd considering that much of what propels science is
> the pressure to publish (written) results (in journals, conferences,
> monographs, etc.). There is a hierarchy of venues in terms of
> prestige, which is in turn linked to research funding, promotion,
> public attention (media coverage, policy influence), etc.
> 
> Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> 
> Moreover, publishing might provide a compelling incentive to the
> related issue of data curation (making data understandable / usable
> to others, e.g. through formatting, annotation, etc.). Currently,
> much data doesn't see much use outside the lab where it was
> generated, so researchers have little incentive to spend time
> "prettying it up" for others (who may find the way it was recorded to
> be inscrutable). Even if they are convinced to "share" their data by
> posting it online, it may seem quite a low priority to spend time
> making it useful to others. If there was pressure to publish the
> dataset, though, then researchers would have that incentive to make
> the data as intuitively useful to others as practicable, so reviewers
> could quickly identify the novelty of the data.
> 
> This doesn't seem so outlandish to me. There are similar efforts to
> provide publication fora for materials which were not traditionally
> unpublished (we might say undersupplied), such as negative results
> and experimental techniques.
> 
> If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> lines:
> 
> * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> by peers 
> * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
> 
> It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> contribution.
> 
> There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other name)
> for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> participation.
> 
> Has this been done already? What are the drawbacks to this approach?

Best,
-- 
Gavin Baker
http://www.gavinbaker.com/
gavin at gavinbaker.com

Science is not everything, but science is very beautiful.
    J. Robert Oppenheimer


From a.p.swan at talk21.com  Mon Mar 16 07:39:54 2009
From: a.p.swan at talk21.com (a.p.swan at talk21.com)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 07:39:54 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
In-Reply-To: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>
Message-ID: <929402.89003.qm@web86405.mail.ird.yahoo.com>

Hi Gavin,

There are lots of moves in the right direction already. All the UK Research Councils have policies on data publishing, so does Wellcome, the European Research Council and various others. 

At a meeting convened by the ESRC last Thursday in London we heard that a system for developing and assigning DOI-like identifiers to datasets is under development. And of course some journals in some fields require supporting data to be published before they will publish articles. This usually means that the author must provide, for example, a Genbank accession number for the dataset, but sometimes journals require the dataset to publish themselves on their own websites. this is far from optimal because they can usually only handle PDF, which is not a readily re-usable format. But it's a start and a good principle to establish.

The issue of career-related rewards for publishing data is still unresolved, though, and until we get to a point where researchers see an explicit link between sharing their data and career progression we will still be stuck in the situation where journal articles are the currency. This is artificial in some disciplines now, where practice and cultures are ready to consider datasets as the primary outputs but are hampered by the lack of reward mechanisms.

Our study on researchers' attitudes and practices with respect to data publication reports in detail on these issues and makes recommendations, including related to the issue of reward. It can be found here: http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/16742/

Alma Swan
Key Perspectives Ltd
Truro, UK

--- On Mon, 16/3/09, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com> wrote:
From: Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
To: "SPARC-OpenData" <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>, open-science at lists.okfn.org
Date: Monday, 16 March, 2009, 6:00 AM

is the title of a post just published on my blog:
http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/

I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
discussion:

> I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> post falls in that category.
> 
> Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> repository.
> 
> This seems a bit odd considering that much of what propels science is
> the pressure to publish (written) results (in journals, conferences,
> monographs, etc.). There is a hierarchy of venues in terms of
> prestige, which is in turn linked to research funding, promotion,
> public attention (media coverage, policy influence), etc.
> 
> Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> 
> Moreover, publishing might provide a compelling incentive to the
> related issue of data curation (making data understandable / usable
> to others, e.g. through formatting, annotation, etc.). Currently,
> much data doesn't see much use outside the lab where it was
> generated, so researchers have little incentive to spend time
> "prettying it up" for others (who may find the way it was
recorded to
> be inscrutable). Even if they are convinced to "share" their
data by
> posting it online, it may seem quite a low priority to spend time
> making it useful to others. If there was pressure to publish the
> dataset, though, then researchers would have that incentive to make
> the data as intuitively useful to others as practicable, so reviewers
> could quickly identify the novelty of the data.
> 
> This doesn't seem so outlandish to me. There are similar efforts to
> provide publication fora for materials which were not traditionally
> unpublished (we might say undersupplied), such as negative results
> and experimental techniques.
> 
> If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> lines:
> 
> * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> by peers 
> * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
> 
> It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> contribution.
> 
> There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other
name)
> for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> participation.
> 
> Has this been done already? What are the drawbacks to this approach?

Best,
-- 
Gavin Baker
http://www.gavinbaker.com/
gavin at gavinbaker.com

Science is not everything, but science is very beautiful.
    J. Robert Oppenheimer

_______________________________________________
open-science mailing list
open-science at lists.okfn.org
http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/ac7d3d97/attachment.htm 

From pm286 at cam.ac.uk  Mon Mar 16 07:54:16 2009
From: pm286 at cam.ac.uk (Peter Murray-Rust)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 07:54:16 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
In-Reply-To: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>
References: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>
Message-ID: <67fd68330903160054x2417aad6n2530f734b6a06d69@mail.gmail.com>

Thanks for positing to the list - I hope it generates discussion.

On Mon, Mar 16, 2009 at 6:00 AM, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com> wrote:

> is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
>
> I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> discussion:
>
> > I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> > post falls in that category.
> >
> > Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> > technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> > the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> > data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> > repository.


This would be simplisitic. There are many digital repositories which serve
this purpose but lots of thought and management go into them. They include
much of bioscience (EBI, NCBI, PDB, etc.) which you could call digital
repositories, but they are domain repositories managed by domain-oriented
scientists. It is often mandatory to deposit at point of publication.

What is simplistic is to think that simply putting data into institutional
repositories will be of great use. But I don't hear a great deal of advocacy
for that

>
> >
> ...



> >
> > Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> > similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> >
> > If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> > lines:

...

>
> >
> > * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> > by peers
> > * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X


Several people are advocating something like this. It depends on the culture
of the domain. I have encountered many peers that do not regard tools to
create and datasets as "proper science". But this is very domain dependent.

>
> >
> > It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> > latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> > been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> > contribution.


There are no built-in metrics, anymore than there are built-in metrics for
publications/papers.  Each data repository will be judged by the community.
It may give rise to metrics or it may not


> >
> > There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> > build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> > metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> > approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> > scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> > funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> > in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> > result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other name)
> > for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> > participation.


Some funders and some domains already do this. Others - like chemistry and
materials see data as a valuable competitive advantage or real-world IP.

P.

-- 
Peter Murray-Rust
Reader in Molecular Informatics
Unilever Centre, Dep. Of Chemistry
University of Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK
+44-1223-763069
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/c1f0b550/attachment.htm 

From Branwen.Hide at rin.ac.uk  Mon Mar 16 10:32:32 2009
From: Branwen.Hide at rin.ac.uk (Hide, Branwen)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 10:32:32 -0000
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
In-Reply-To: <67fd68330903160054x2417aad6n2530f734b6a06d69@mail.gmail.com>
References: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>
	<67fd68330903160054x2417aad6n2530f734b6a06d69@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <CE0B7072F12A4445B9D57BCF657430840322D2A5@w2k3-lonex2.ad.bl.uk>

The Royal Meteorological Society and the National Centre for Atmospheric
Science are in the process of developing a data journal specifically for
Meteorological Data. A report of the project is due the end of April.
More information on the programme can be found at
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/reppres/sue/ojims.aspx or on
the project site http://proj.badc.rl.ac.uk/ojims

 

Branwen Hide

Research Information Network (www.rin.ac.uk <http://www.rin.ac.uk/> )

 

 

________________________________

From: open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org
[mailto:open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org] On Behalf Of Peter
Murray-Rust
Sent: 16 March 2009 07:54
To: Gavin Baker
Cc: SPARC-OpenData; open-science at lists.okfn.org
Subject: Re: [open-science] Why not publish data?

 

Thanks for positing to the list - I hope it generates discussion.

On Mon, Mar 16, 2009 at 6:00 AM, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
wrote:

is the title of a post just published on my blog:
http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/

I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
discussion:

> I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> post falls in that category.
>
> Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> repository.

 

This would be simplisitic. There are many digital repositories which
serve this purpose but lots of thought and management go into them. They
include much of bioscience (EBI, NCBI, PDB, etc.) which you could call
digital repositories, but they are domain repositories managed by
domain-oriented scientists. It is often mandatory to deposit at point of
publication.

What is simplistic is to think that simply putting data into
institutional repositories will be of great use. But I don't hear a
great deal of advocacy for that

	
	>
	...

 

	>
	> Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to
create a
	> similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling
incentive.
	>
	> If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between
these
	> lines:

... 

	
	>
	> * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly
regarded
	> by peers
	> * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X


Several people are advocating something like this. It depends on the
culture of the domain. I have encountered many peers that do not regard
tools to create and datasets as "proper science". But this is very
domain dependent.

	
	>
	> It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the
former; the
	> latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has
already
	> been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
	> contribution.

 

There are no built-in metrics, anymore than there are built-in metrics
for publications/papers.  Each data repository will be judged by the
community. It may give rise to metrics or it may not

	
	>
	> There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be
to
	> build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g.
awards,
	> metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
	> approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of
other
	> scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of
research
	> funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written
results)
	> in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the
best
	> result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other
name)
	> for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
	> participation.


Some funders and some domains already do this. Others - like chemistry
and materials see data as a valuable competitive advantage or real-world
IP. 


P. 


-- 
Peter Murray-Rust
Reader in Molecular Informatics
Unilever Centre, Dep. Of Chemistry
University of Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK
+44-1223-763069
The contents of this email are sent in confidence for the use of the intended recipients only. If you are not one of the intended recipients, please do not take action on it or show it to anyone else, but return this email to the sender and delete your copy of it.
 
Find the Research Information Network online at www.rin.ac.uk
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/0e8a3960/attachment-0001.htm 

From ian at mulvany.net  Mon Mar 16 11:13:25 2009
From: ian at mulvany.net (Ian Mulvany)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 11:13:25 +0000
Subject: [open-science] open-science Digest, Vol 6, Issue 5
In-Reply-To: <mailman.59106.1237199554.30410.open-science@lists.okfn.org>
References: <mailman.59106.1237199554.30410.open-science@lists.okfn.org>
Message-ID: <dc8eef530903160413y3c24f878l7cc459f4ec1273db@mail.gmail.com>

Nice thread.

Is there an index of data repositories?

Who is gearing up to curate and maintain BIG data? Google pulled out, Amazon
is starting to get it's feet wet in this area, anyone else?

- Ian

On Mon, Mar 16, 2009 at 10:32 AM, <open-science-request at lists.okfn.org>wrote:

> Send open-science mailing list submissions to
>        open-science at lists.okfn.org
>
> To subscribe or unsubscribe via the World Wide Web, visit
>        http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
> or, via email, send a message with subject or body 'help' to
>        open-science-request at lists.okfn.org
>
> You can reach the person managing the list at
>        open-science-owner at lists.okfn.org
>
> When replying, please edit your Subject line so it is more specific
> than "Re: Contents of open-science digest..."
>
>
> Today's Topics:
>
>   1. Why not publish data? (Gavin Baker)
>   2. Re: Why not publish data? (a.p.swan at talk21.com)
>   3. Re: Why not publish data? (Peter Murray-Rust)
>   4. Re: Why not publish data? (Hide, Branwen)
>
>
> ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Message: 1
> Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 02:00:26 -0400
> From: Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
> To: SPARC-OpenData <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>,
>        open-science at lists.okfn.org
> Message-ID: <49BDEAFA.6090207 at gavinbaker.com>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
>
> is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
>
> I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> discussion:
>
> > I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> > post falls in that category.
> >
> > Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> > technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> > the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> > data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> > repository.
> >
> > This seems a bit odd considering that much of what propels science is
> > the pressure to publish (written) results (in journals, conferences,
> > monographs, etc.). There is a hierarchy of venues in terms of
> > prestige, which is in turn linked to research funding, promotion,
> > public attention (media coverage, policy influence), etc.
> >
> > Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> > similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> >
> > Moreover, publishing might provide a compelling incentive to the
> > related issue of data curation (making data understandable / usable
> > to others, e.g. through formatting, annotation, etc.). Currently,
> > much data doesn't see much use outside the lab where it was
> > generated, so researchers have little incentive to spend time
> > "prettying it up" for others (who may find the way it was recorded to
> > be inscrutable). Even if they are convinced to "share" their data by
> > posting it online, it may seem quite a low priority to spend time
> > making it useful to others. If there was pressure to publish the
> > dataset, though, then researchers would have that incentive to make
> > the data as intuitively useful to others as practicable, so reviewers
> > could quickly identify the novelty of the data.
> >
> > This doesn't seem so outlandish to me. There are similar efforts to
> > provide publication fora for materials which were not traditionally
> > unpublished (we might say undersupplied), such as negative results
> > and experimental techniques.
> >
> > If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> > lines:
> >
> > * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> > by peers
> > * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
> >
> > It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> > latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> > been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> > contribution.
> >
> > There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> > build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> > metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> > approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> > scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> > funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> > in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> > result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other name)
> > for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> > participation.
> >
> > Has this been done already? What are the drawbacks to this approach?
>
> Best,
> --
> Gavin Baker
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/
> gavin at gavinbaker.com
>
> Science is not everything, but science is very beautiful.
>    J. Robert Oppenheimer
>
>
>
> ------------------------------
>
> Message: 2
> Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 07:39:54 +0000 (GMT)
> From: a.p.swan at talk21.com
> Subject: Re: [open-science] Why not publish data?
> To: SPARC-OpenData <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>,
>        open-science at lists.okfn.org,    Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> Message-ID: <929402.89003.qm at web86405.mail.ird.yahoo.com>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
>
> Hi Gavin,
>
> There are lots of moves in the right direction already. All the UK Research
> Councils have policies on data publishing, so does Wellcome, the European
> Research Council and various others.
>
> At a meeting convened by the ESRC last Thursday in London we heard that a
> system for developing and assigning DOI-like identifiers to datasets is
> under development. And of course some journals in some fields require
> supporting data to be published before they will publish articles. This
> usually means that the author must provide, for example, a Genbank accession
> number for the dataset, but sometimes journals require the dataset to
> publish themselves on their own websites. this is far from optimal because
> they can usually only handle PDF, which is not a readily re-usable format.
> But it's a start and a good principle to establish.
>
> The issue of career-related rewards for publishing data is still
> unresolved, though, and until we get to a point where researchers see an
> explicit link between sharing their data and career progression we will
> still be stuck in the situation where journal articles are the currency.
> This is artificial in some disciplines now, where practice and cultures are
> ready to consider datasets as the primary outputs but are hampered by the
> lack of reward mechanisms.
>
> Our study on researchers' attitudes and practices with respect to data
> publication reports in detail on these issues and makes recommendations,
> including related to the issue of reward. It can be found here:
> http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/16742/
>
> Alma Swan
> Key Perspectives Ltd
> Truro, UK
>
> --- On Mon, 16/3/09, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com> wrote:
> From: Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
> To: "SPARC-OpenData" <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>, open-science at lists.okfn.org
> Date: Monday, 16 March, 2009, 6:00 AM
>
> is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
>
> I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> discussion:
>
> > I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> > post falls in that category.
> >
> > Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> > technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> > the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> > data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> > repository.
> >
> > This seems a bit odd considering that much of what propels science is
> > the pressure to publish (written) results (in journals, conferences,
> > monographs, etc.). There is a hierarchy of venues in terms of
> > prestige, which is in turn linked to research funding, promotion,
> > public attention (media coverage, policy influence), etc.
> >
> > Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> > similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> >
> > Moreover, publishing might provide a compelling incentive to the
> > related issue of data curation (making data understandable / usable
> > to others, e.g. through formatting, annotation, etc.). Currently,
> > much data doesn't see much use outside the lab where it was
> > generated, so researchers have little incentive to spend time
> > "prettying it up" for others (who may find the way it was
> recorded to
> > be inscrutable). Even if they are convinced to "share" their
> data by
> > posting it online, it may seem quite a low priority to spend time
> > making it useful to others. If there was pressure to publish the
> > dataset, though, then researchers would have that incentive to make
> > the data as intuitively useful to others as practicable, so reviewers
> > could quickly identify the novelty of the data.
> >
> > This doesn't seem so outlandish to me. There are similar efforts to
> > provide publication fora for materials which were not traditionally
> > unpublished (we might say undersupplied), such as negative results
> > and experimental techniques.
> >
> > If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> > lines:
> >
> > * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> > by peers
> > * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
> >
> > It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> > latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> > been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> > contribution.
> >
> > There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> > build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> > metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> > approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> > scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> > funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> > in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> > result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other
> name)
> > for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> > participation.
> >
> > Has this been done already? What are the drawbacks to this approach?
>
> Best,
> --
> Gavin Baker
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/
> gavin at gavinbaker.com
>
> Science is not everything, but science is very beautiful.
>    J. Robert Oppenheimer
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
> -------------- next part --------------
> An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
> URL:
> http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/ac7d3d97/attachment-0001.htm
>
> ------------------------------
>
> Message: 3
> Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 07:54:16 +0000
> From: Peter Murray-Rust <pm286 at cam.ac.uk>
> Subject: Re: [open-science] Why not publish data?
> To: Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> Cc: SPARC-OpenData <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>,
>        open-science at lists.okfn.org
> Message-ID:
>        <67fd68330903160054x2417aad6n2530f734b6a06d69 at mail.gmail.com>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
>
> Thanks for positing to the list - I hope it generates discussion.
>
> On Mon, Mar 16, 2009 at 6:00 AM, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com> wrote:
>
> > is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> > http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
> >
> > I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> > post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> > discussion:
> >
> > > I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> > > post falls in that category.
> > >
> > > Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> > > technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> > > the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> > > data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> > > repository.
>
>
> This would be simplisitic. There are many digital repositories which serve
> this purpose but lots of thought and management go into them. They include
> much of bioscience (EBI, NCBI, PDB, etc.) which you could call digital
> repositories, but they are domain repositories managed by domain-oriented
> scientists. It is often mandatory to deposit at point of publication.
>
> What is simplistic is to think that simply putting data into institutional
> repositories will be of great use. But I don't hear a great deal of
> advocacy
> for that
>
> >
> > >
> > ...
>
>
>
> > >
> > > Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
> > > similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
> > >
> > > If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
> > > lines:
>
> ...
>
> >
> > >
> > > * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
> > > by peers
> > > * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
>
>
> Several people are advocating something like this. It depends on the
> culture
> of the domain. I have encountered many peers that do not regard tools to
> create and datasets as "proper science". But this is very domain dependent.
>
> >
> > >
> > > It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
> > > latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
> > > been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
> > > contribution.
>
>
> There are no built-in metrics, anymore than there are built-in metrics for
> publications/papers.  Each data repository will be judged by the community.
> It may give rise to metrics or it may not
>
>
> > >
> > > There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
> > > build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
> > > metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
> > > approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
> > > scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
> > > funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
> > > in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
> > > result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other name)
> > > for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
> > > participation.
>
>
> Some funders and some domains already do this. Others - like chemistry and
> materials see data as a valuable competitive advantage or real-world IP.
>
> P.
>
> --
> Peter Murray-Rust
> Reader in Molecular Informatics
> Unilever Centre, Dep. Of Chemistry
> University of Cambridge
> CB2 1EW, UK
> +44-1223-763069
> -------------- next part --------------
> An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
> URL:
> http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/c1f0b550/attachment-0001.htm
>
> ------------------------------
>
> Message: 4
> Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 10:32:32 -0000
> From: "Hide, Branwen" <Branwen.Hide at rin.ac.uk>
> Subject: Re: [open-science] Why not publish data?
> To: "Peter Murray-Rust" <pm286 at cam.ac.uk>, "Gavin Baker"
>        <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> Cc: SPARC-OpenData <SPARC-OpenData at arl.org>,
>        open-science at lists.okfn.org
> Message-ID:
>        <CE0B7072F12A4445B9D57BCF657430840322D2A5 at w2k3-lonex2.ad.bl.uk>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
>
> The Royal Meteorological Society and the National Centre for Atmospheric
> Science are in the process of developing a data journal specifically for
> Meteorological Data. A report of the project is due the end of April.
> More information on the programme can be found at
> http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/reppres/sue/ojims.aspx or on
> the project site http://proj.badc.rl.ac.uk/ojims
>
>
>
> Branwen Hide
>
> Research Information Network (www.rin.ac.uk <http://www.rin.ac.uk/> )
>
>
>
>
>
> ________________________________
>
> From: open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org
> [mailto:open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org] On Behalf Of Peter
> Murray-Rust
> Sent: 16 March 2009 07:54
> To: Gavin Baker
> Cc: SPARC-OpenData; open-science at lists.okfn.org
> Subject: Re: [open-science] Why not publish data?
>
>
>
> Thanks for positing to the list - I hope it generates discussion.
>
> On Mon, Mar 16, 2009 at 6:00 AM, Gavin Baker <gavin at gavinbaker.com>
> wrote:
>
> is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
>
> I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> discussion:
>
> > I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
> > post falls in that category.
> >
> > Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
> > technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
> > the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
> > data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
> > repository.
>
>
>
> This would be simplisitic. There are many digital repositories which
> serve this purpose but lots of thought and management go into them. They
> include much of bioscience (EBI, NCBI, PDB, etc.) which you could call
> digital repositories, but they are domain repositories managed by
> domain-oriented scientists. It is often mandatory to deposit at point of
> publication.
>
> What is simplistic is to think that simply putting data into
> institutional repositories will be of great use. But I don't hear a
> great deal of advocacy for that
>
>
>        >
>        ...
>
>
>
>        >
>        > Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to
> create a
>        > similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling
> incentive.
>        >
>        > If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between
> these
>        > lines:
>
> ...
>
>
>        >
>        > * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly
> regarded
>        > by peers
>        > * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
>
>
> Several people are advocating something like this. It depends on the
> culture of the domain. I have encountered many peers that do not regard
> tools to create and datasets as "proper science". But this is very
> domain dependent.
>
>
>        >
>        > It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the
> former; the
>        > latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has
> already
>        > been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
>        > contribution.
>
>
>
> There are no built-in metrics, anymore than there are built-in metrics
> for publications/papers.  Each data repository will be judged by the
> community. It may give rise to metrics or it may not
>
>
>        >
>        > There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be
> to
>        > build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g.
> awards,
>        > metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
>        > approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of
> other
>        > scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of
> research
>        > funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written
> results)
>        > in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the
> best
>        > result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other
> name)
>        > for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
>        > participation.
>
>
> Some funders and some domains already do this. Others - like chemistry
> and materials see data as a valuable competitive advantage or real-world
> IP.
>
>
> P.
>
>
> --
> Peter Murray-Rust
> Reader in Molecular Informatics
> Unilever Centre, Dep. Of Chemistry
> University of Cambridge
> CB2 1EW, UK
> +44-1223-763069
> The contents of this email are sent in confidence for the use of the
> intended recipients only. If you are not one of the intended recipients,
> please do not take action on it or show it to anyone else, but return this
> email to the sender and delete your copy of it.
>
> Find the Research Information Network online at www.rin.ac.uk
> -------------- next part --------------
> An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
> URL:
> http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/0e8a3960/attachment.htm
>
> ------------------------------
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>
>
> End of open-science Digest, Vol 6, Issue 5
> ******************************************
>



-- 

----
ian at mulvany.net | +447506679466
(new number, no voicemail, txt or email please)
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/b03f65c8/attachment-0001.htm 

From jonathan.gray at okfn.org  Mon Mar 16 11:43:00 2009
From: jonathan.gray at okfn.org (Jonathan Gray)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 12:43:00 +0100
Subject: [open-science] open-science Digest, Vol 6, Issue 5
In-Reply-To: <dc8eef530903160413y3c24f878l7cc459f4ec1273db@mail.gmail.com>
References: <mailman.59106.1237199554.30410.open-science@lists.okfn.org>
	<dc8eef530903160413y3c24f878l7cc459f4ec1273db@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <54ca21750903160443i403dbce4hf745b3b43040c1fe@mail.gmail.com>

2009/3/16 Ian Mulvany <ian at mulvany.net>:
> Is there an index of data repositories?

There's a collection of open data tagged 'science' on CKAN.

  http://ckan.net/tag/read/science

CKAN is a community driven registry - and we encourage anyone to add
to it, if they know of any other open datasets!

> Who is gearing up to curate and maintain BIG data? Google pulled out, Amazon
> is starting to get it's feet wet in this area, anyone else?

Amazon's Deepak Singh has been looking into open datasets for Amazon
Web Services. I've corresponded with him about adding material listed
on CKAN - and they are always interested in hearing of new data they
could add.

My own feeling is that something community driven has the *potential*
to be more rich and comprehensive than something curated - mainly
because this could draw on the expertise of people working in lots of
different areas, who have up to date knowledge of what is available.
Ideally this would be a 'living' directory, integrated into the
working practice of many who work with data, who clean it up and
re-use it, and so on. Also people could take on curatorial/editorial
roles in relation to certain collections. What do people think?

We discussed this (specifically in relation to CKAN), and other things
at the 'Workshop on Finding and Re-using Open Scientific Resources',
last autumn:

  http://okfn.org/wiki/OpenScience/Workshop

Also I think this is now within the remit of the new working group on
open data in science:

  http://okfn.org/wiki/wg/science

Warm regards,

-- 
Jonathan Gray

Community Coordinator
The Open Knowledge Foundation
http://www.okfn.org


From cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk  Mon Mar 16 16:06:13 2009
From: cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk (Neylon, DC (Cameron))
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 16:06:13 -0000
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data?
In-Reply-To: <49BDEAFA.6090207@gavinbaker.com>
Message-ID: <C5E42975.46BB%cameron.neylon@stfc.ac.uk>

Also left this as a comment at the blog:

I think it depends a lot on what you mean by a "journal". I would be against
the idea of creating a formal journal (with peer review, page numbers,
indexes) for data because I think it would retrograde step. The web was
built to house datasets and we are now building an infrastructure that will
let this be done properly. I think it much more effective to build purpose
built systems designed to hold, aggregate, and process data in sensible, and
web native, ways.

If however you mean that there is value in making datasets citeable objects
and providing incentives for people to "publish" datasets in a useful way
then I am all for it. The crystallography community have been most effective
at creating "data journals" (the Acta Cryst set) and it is because of these
journals that crystallographers are amongst the most cited and highly
published scientists.

The flip side of this is the tendency of people to try and push "dataset
shaped pegs into paper sized holes". Many of the papers that describe both
biological structures and genome sequences seem to be a dataset in a
desperate search for some sort of interesting statement that can be hung off
it. Many interesting and important structures and sequences would have been
better published as "here it is, make of it what you will" rather than
trying to craft a somewhat nebulous paper around it.

The same could be said of the publication of software tools (and indeed
databases). People are desperate to publish a paper so they can add it to
their CV and so that people have something to cite. Not because a paper is a
good way of describing or documenting the work, but because it is the only
way people can currently get credit.

So my argument would be that we need to expand the way we use and apply
citations, and make much more serious efforts to make databases, web pages,
tools, etc all solid citeable objects. Otherwise we are going to end up with
a lot more journals (don't we have enough already?) and all the additional
overheads that go with it. If the purpose of creating a journal is only to
make the dataset citeable then I think there are better ways of going about
it. 



On 16/3/09 06:00, "Gavin Baker" <gavin at gavinbaker.com> wrote:

> is the title of a post just published on my blog:
> http://www.gavinbaker.com/2009/03/16/why-not-publish-data/
> 
> I'm eager for comments and critique. Feel free to comment on the blog
> post or respond on this list. I'll copy the post before to facilitate
> discussion:
> 
>> I try to avoid writing things that may make me sound stupid, but this
>> post falls in that category.
>> 
>> Recently I was reading about efforts related to data sharing:
>> technological infrastructure, curation, educating researchers, and
>> the like. I was struck by the thought that most of the advocacy for
>> data sharing boils down to an exhortation to stick it in a digital
>> repository.
>> 
>> This seems a bit odd considering that much of what propels science is
>> the pressure to publish (written) results (in journals, conferences,
>> monographs, etc.). There is a hierarchy of venues in terms of
>> prestige, which is in turn linked to research funding, promotion,
>> public attention (media coverage, policy influence), etc.
>> 
>> Might the best way to get researchers to share data be to create a
>> similar system for datasets? It might provide a compelling incentive.
>> 
>> Moreover, publishing might provide a compelling incentive to the
>> related issue of data curation (making data understandable / usable
>> to others, e.g. through formatting, annotation, etc.). Currently,
>> much data doesn't see much use outside the lab where it was
>> generated, so researchers have little incentive to spend time
>> "prettying it up" for others (who may find the way it was recorded to
>> be inscrutable). Even if they are convinced to "share" their data by
>> posting it online, it may seem quite a low priority to spend time
>> making it useful to others. If there was pressure to publish the
>> dataset, though, then researchers would have that incentive to make
>> the data as intuitively useful to others as practicable, so reviewers
>> could quickly identify the novelty of the data.
>> 
>> This doesn't seem so outlandish to me. There are similar efforts to
>> provide publication fora for materials which were not traditionally
>> unpublished (we might say undersupplied), such as negative results
>> and experimental techniques.
>> 
>> If you think of it in terms of a CV, the difference is between these
>> lines:
>> 
>> * Created and shared large, valuable dataset which is highly regarded
>> by peers 
>> * Publication in J. Big Useful Datasets, impact factor X
>> 
>> It may be hard for a reviewer to quantify or validate the former; the
>> latter demonstrates that the researcher's contribution has already
>> been validated and provides built-in metrics to quantify the
>> contribution.
>> 
>> There are other ways to skin the same cat. One option would be to
>> build alternative systems for conferring recognition (e.g. awards,
>> metrics for contributions to shared datasets, etc.). The other
>> approach is to make data sharing a more enforceable part of other
>> scientific endeavors, e.g. mandatory as a condition of research
>> funding, mandatory as a condition of publication (of written results)
>> in a journal, etc. I think multiple approaches will yield the best
>> result. It seems to me that creating "journals" (or some other name)
>> for "publishing" datasets could be a useful way to spur
>> participation.
>> 
>> Has this been done already? What are the drawbacks to this approach?
> 
> Best,

-- 
Scanned by iCritical.


From jeanclaude.bradley at gmail.com  Mon Mar 16 23:24:56 2009
From: jeanclaude.bradley at gmail.com (Jean-Claude Bradley)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 19:24:56 -0400
Subject: [open-science] Launch of new Working Group on Open Data in
	Science
In-Reply-To: <54ca21750903140230p912b393mc8d3b98e122f28cf@mail.gmail.com>
References: <54ca21750903140230p912b393mc8d3b98e122f28cf@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <9dd1f6d60903161624m72de9d9tb91dc95c1fc20e21@mail.gmail.com>

Jonathan,
If you are collecting prizes to support Open Data please list the Open
Notebook Science Solubility Challenge Submeta awards:
http://onschallenge.wikispaces.com/submetaawards08

Jean-Claude

On Sat, Mar 14, 2009 at 5:30 AM, Jonathan Gray <jonathan.gray at okfn.org>wrote:

> Hi all,
>
> We are pleased to announce the launch of a new Working Group on Open
> Data in Science. In the first instance, the group will aim to:
>
>  1. Act as a central point of reference and support for people who
> think they are interested in open data in science.
>  2. Identify practices of early adopters, collecting data and
> developing guides.
>  3. Act as a hub for the development of low cost, community driven
> projects around open data in science.
>
> We are currently working on:
>
>  * a prize for open data in science
>  * a service to request that a given dataset to be made open or to
> request clarification about whether or not it can be re-used
>  * case studies on the benefits of open data in different domains
>
> Further details can be found at:
>
>  http://okfn.org/wiki/wg/science
>  http://blog.okfn.org/2009/03/13/working-group-on-open-data-in-science/
>
> --
> Jonathan Gray
>
> Community Coordinator
> The Open Knowledge Foundation
> http://www.okfn.org
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>



-- 
Jean-Claude Bradley, Ph. D.
E-Learning Coordinator for the College of Arts and Sciences
Associate Professor of Chemistry
Drexel University

http://drexel-coas-elearning.blogspot.com
http://drexel-coas-talks-mp3-podcast.blogspot.com/
http://usefulchem.blogspot.com
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/6c6c4689/attachment.htm 

From Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu  Mon Mar 16 23:35:50 2009
From: Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu (Tim Schweizer)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 18:35:50 -0500
Subject: [open-science] Open Science digest Vol 6, Issue 6 - data sets
Message-ID: <93f340550903161635q469b97f7pae660c5cba6c12c2@mail.gmail.com>

I think we need to move towards Open Science. I think it is time to have
Public Domain be the default for data sets submitted to journals, online
sites, etc.

Public domain returns science to its origins.

We need to embrace "rules" that fit the 21st century.

Tim Schweizer, Ph.D.
Office: (001) 563.387.1131
Mobile: (001) 563.581.9716
E-mail: Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu
Skype: tim123innovate
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/3bc736f1/attachment.htm 

From peters at earlham.edu  Tue Mar 17 03:15:09 2009
From: peters at earlham.edu (Peter Suber)
Date: Mon, 16 Mar 2009 23:15:09 -0400
Subject: [open-science] open-science Digest, Vol 6, Issue 5
In-Reply-To: <dc8eef530903160413y3c24f878l7cc459f4ec1273db@mail.gmail.co
 m>
References: <mailman.59106.1237199554.30410.open-science@lists.okfn.org>
	<dc8eef530903160413y3c24f878l7cc459f4ec1273db@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <200903170315.n2H3FLrm001728@sipala.earlham.edu>

At 07:13 AM 3/16/2009, Ivan Mulvany wrote:

>Is there an index of data repositories?


The OAD wiki has a list,
<http://oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Data_repositories>http://oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Data_repositories 


      Peter

Peter Suber
http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
peter.suber at earlham.edu

-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090316/42623bdb/attachment.htm 

From sabine at 3dmetrics.co.uk  Tue Mar 17 07:37:43 2009
From: sabine at 3dmetrics.co.uk (Sabine Kurjo McNeill)
Date: Tue, 17 Mar 2009 07:37:43 -0000
Subject: [open-science] Open science from public funding
Message-ID: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>

In support of Tim's and Jean-Claude's remarks, shouldn't it be obvious to
any scientist that publicly funded work has to be in the public domain? 
 
Public funding vs private profit is after all the big distinction between
the state and industry. On what grounds should any data not be open? 
 
Sabine [formerly software analyst at CERN]
 
 <http://www.3dmetrics.co.uk/> 3D Metrics [website with > 54,000 hits]
 
 <http://www.3dmetrics.me.uk/> Blog with > 3,000 hits
 
21a Goldhurst Terrace
London NW6 3HB
 
T: +44 207 328 3701
M: 07968 039 141
 
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090317/9fb2bdac/attachment-0001.htm 

From cwhooker at fastmail.fm  Tue Mar 17 08:16:49 2009
From: cwhooker at fastmail.fm (Bill Hooker)
Date: Tue, 17 Mar 2009 01:16:49 -0700
Subject: [open-science] Open science from public funding
In-Reply-To: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>
References: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>
Message-ID: <1237277809.19548.1305804501@webmail.messagingengine.com>


> On what grounds should any data not be open? 

In the US, the Bayh-Dole act is the main culprit:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayh-Dole_Act

It allows universities and other research bodies to own IP derived from
federally funded work.  Beancounters responded to this in predictable
fashion, and all US scientists who "came of age" (e.g. went through grad
school) since 1980 have been steeped all their careers in the resulting
culture of secrecy.  

Add to Bayh-Dole the skyrocketing level of competition for research
positions in academia over the last three decades (competition based
almost exclusively on publication, publication in turn being dependent
on data) and you reach the current situation where researchers would
rather share a toothbrush than share data (Carol Goble?).

There is, I think, a similar provision in Australian law -- certainly
all universities and research institutions have tech transfer offices,
and certainly the same bass-ackwards me-first scientific culture has
arisen there.  I don't know about other countries.

cheers,

B.


From jeanclaude.bradley at gmail.com  Tue Mar 17 08:44:28 2009
From: jeanclaude.bradley at gmail.com (Jean-Claude Bradley)
Date: Tue, 17 Mar 2009 04:44:28 -0400
Subject: [open-science] Open science from public funding
In-Reply-To: <1237277809.19548.1305804501@webmail.messagingengine.com>
References: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>
	<1237277809.19548.1305804501@webmail.messagingengine.com>
Message-ID: <9dd1f6d60903170144x1d174e4ei4c94319c2736c0f6@mail.gmail.com>

The Bayh-Dole act does have an effect on sharing on a few levels.  In
principle one could make all data public immediately after filing a
provisional US patent, which involves simply putting a copy of work to be
published in an envelope and paying a fee.  It buys the researcher a year to
file a full international patent.  We used to do this routinely before
sending out any manuscript for publication.  You could probably just copy
your lab notebook and raw data files and do the same if you wanted to share
your notebook as quickly as possible and still maintain patent protection.
However there is a strong dissentive to do so because any public document
that seems to contradict the findings in the patent could be used down the
road to challenge a patent.  So there would be a downside to publishing
failed experiments.  When you report 80% yield someone might looks at all
the experiments where the yields were much lower.

Also people don't all agree about what should be made public.  I don't think
it should be mandatory to share all data (essentially Open Notebook Science)
but I think that funding agencies should view it as a positive if that is
included in grant applications.

Jean-Claude

On Tue, Mar 17, 2009 at 4:16 AM, Bill Hooker <cwhooker at fastmail.fm> wrote:

>
> > On what grounds should any data not be open?
>
> In the US, the Bayh-Dole act is the main culprit:
>
> http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayh-Dole_Act
>
> It allows universities and other research bodies to own IP derived from
> federally funded work.  Beancounters responded to this in predictable
> fashion, and all US scientists who "came of age" (e.g. went through grad
> school) since 1980 have been steeped all their careers in the resulting
> culture of secrecy.
>
> Add to Bayh-Dole the skyrocketing level of competition for research
> positions in academia over the last three decades (competition based
> almost exclusively on publication, publication in turn being dependent
> on data) and you reach the current situation where researchers would
> rather share a toothbrush than share data (Carol Goble?).
>
> There is, I think, a similar provision in Australian law -- certainly
> all universities and research institutions have tech transfer offices,
> and certainly the same bass-ackwards me-first scientific culture has
> arisen there.  I don't know about other countries.
>
> cheers,
>
> B.
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>



-- 
Jean-Claude Bradley, Ph. D.
E-Learning Coordinator for the College of Arts and Sciences
Associate Professor of Chemistry
Drexel University

http://drexel-coas-elearning.blogspot.com
http://drexel-coas-talks-mp3-podcast.blogspot.com/
http://usefulchem.blogspot.com
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090317/b15ec14b/attachment.htm 

From pm286 at cam.ac.uk  Tue Mar 17 10:59:54 2009
From: pm286 at cam.ac.uk (Peter Murray-Rust)
Date: Tue, 17 Mar 2009 10:59:54 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Open science from public funding
In-Reply-To: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>
References: <000001c9a6d3$4ba73790$e2f5a6b0$@co.uk>
Message-ID: <67fd68330903170359t2b10c7cckedf1e62f60276652@mail.gmail.com>

Sabine,
Sometimes I look longingly at HEP as a domain where Openness is endemic.

There are very good reasons why data is not open in chemistry.

There is a large chemical information market where information is collected
and sold back t the community. Organizations like Chemical Abstracts have a
turnover of somewhere like 500-1000 million USD. The chief officers of the
American Chemical Society have to be rewarded at competitive industrial
rates - some of them get nearly 2M USD yr-1.

If data were open their business model would need to be refactored. So the
ACS (and Wiley) copyright supplemental data and forbid the downloading of
their data for research. If I publish data I have to hand over the ownership
to these publishers.

In this argument "good" = "compelling in a business sense" - not "morally
justifiable".

P.


2009/3/17 Sabine Kurjo McNeill <sabine at 3dmetrics.co.uk>

>  In support of Tim?s and Jean-Claude?s remarks, shouldn?t it be obvious to
> any scientist that publicly funded work has to be in the public domain?
>
>
>
> Public funding vs private profit is after all the big distinction between
> the state and industry. On what grounds should any data not be open?
>
>
>
> Sabine [formerly software analyst at CERN]
>

_______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>
>


-- 
Peter Murray-Rust
Reader in Molecular Informatics
Unilever Centre, Dep. Of Chemistry
University of Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK
+44-1223-763069
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090317/a29933ee/attachment.htm 

From cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk  Wed Mar 18 09:07:29 2009
From: cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk (Neylon)
Date: Wed, 18 Mar 2009 09:07:29 +0000
Subject: [open-science] STFC Strategy consulation
Message-ID: <C5E66A51.4778%cameron.neylon@stfc.ac.uk>

The strategy document for the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council
is up for consultation until Friday. STFC is the UK's central research
infrastructure funder. We build, operate, and subscribe to facilities
including Diamond, ISIS, Hartree Computational Centre, ESRF, ILL, CERN, and
a wide range of international astronomy facilities. We are therefore the
UK's primary research data generator and also have a strong coordinating
presence within the UK E-science programmes.

It might therefore be argued that STFC should take a leadership position
within the UK research councils on data availability, curation, and
management. The strategy document, which covers approach, priorities, and
future directions currently contains no mention of either Open Access or
Open Data. If you feel that these might be appropriate issues to be
addressed in the strategy document then please do comment at:

http://www.stfc.ac.uk/STFCConsultation/cnHome.aspx

Cheers

Cameron

-- 
Scanned by iCritical.


From cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk  Wed Mar 18 21:46:55 2009
From: cameron.neylon at stfc.ac.uk (Neylon)
Date: Wed, 18 Mar 2009 21:46:55 +0000
Subject: [open-science] Standards for raw data reporting in Clinical Trials
Message-ID: <C5E71C4F.47DC%cameron.neylon@stfc.ac.uk>

Via Bill Hooker, this announcement from BMC on developing standards for
presenting raw data in publications is very promising.

http://blogs.openaccesscentral.com/blogs/bmcblog/entry/towards_agreement_on_
best_practice

Cheers

Cameron 

-- 
Scanned by iCritical.


From Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu  Thu Mar 19 07:26:15 2009
From: Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu (Tim Schweizer)
Date: Thu, 19 Mar 2009 02:26:15 -0500
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data? (Neylon, DC (Cameron))
Message-ID: <93f340550903190026v1d8c9c0dkb5c7d32d35263f3d@mail.gmail.com>

I think Cameron is hinting at a major problem (this is my interpretation, so
if I'm wrong, blame me, not Cameron).

The incentives are biased towards anything that builds CVs. So, we have way
too many journals that are underwritten by libraries. Even the editors of
journals have admitted that very few people read the journals - they exist
solely as a means build CVs. In my opinion, if 95% of the world's journals
disappeared, there would be no loss in learning or knowledge.

Most people cannot risk studying what they find *really* profound and
interesting. The risk of pursuing those hypothesis are high in terms of not
getting the work published (not getting credit for the pursuit of their best
ideas on the CV). This is the great tragedy.

Tim Schweizer, Ph.D.
Office: (001) 563.387.1131
Mobile: (001) 563.581.9716
E-mail: Tim.Schweizer at luther.edu
Skype: tim123innovate
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: http://lists.okfn.org/pipermail/open-science/attachments/20090319/91ed06bc/attachment.htm 

From Rhian.Cunliffe at biomedcentral.com  Thu Mar 19 10:21:11 2009
From: Rhian.Cunliffe at biomedcentral.com (Rhian.Cunliffe at biomedcentral.com)
Date: Thu, 19 Mar 2009 10:21:11 -0000
Subject: [open-science] Standards for raw data reporting in Clinical
	Trials
Message-ID: <C156D27852C32340835BA1005A026FA503353377@ms4bmc.lsc.net>


For those of you that haven't heard of BMC Research Notes
(http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcresnotes/), it is one of the newer
journals in the BMC-series.

BMC Research Notes is an open access journal publishing scientifically
sound research across all fields of biology and medicine, enabling
authors to publish updates to previous research, software tools and
databases, data sets, small-scale clinical studies, and reports of
confirmatory or 'negative' results.

A key objective with BMC Research Notes is to ensure that associated
data sets are published in standard, reusable formats whenever possible.
Data sets published in the journal will be made publicly accessible in a
way that makes them searchable and easily harvested for reuse. We are
keen, therefore, to support researchers who have a special interest in
data format standardization and we are aiming to develop more
comprehensive data standardisation information for our authors and
readers to enable us to present data in a standardised and mineable way.
If you have any interest in this area of work or any information that
you feel would be of use, please get in touch.  

Best wishes,

Rhian Cunliffe 
Senior Journal Development Editor, Medicine
BMC-series journals

BioMed Central
Middlesex House
34-42 Cleveland Street
London W1T 4LB

email: researchnotes at biomedcentral.com
Web: www.biomedcentral.com

BioMed Central is moving, please note our new address effective Friday
20th March  

BioMed Central
Floor 6, 236 Gray's Inn Road
London, WC1X 8HL



-----Original Message-----
From: open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org
[mailto:open-science-bounces at lists.okfn.org] On Behalf Of Neylon
Sent: 18 March 2009 21:47
To: open-science at lists.okfn.org
Subject: [open-science] Standards for raw data reporting in Clinical
Trials

Via Bill Hooker, this announcement from BMC on developing standards for
presenting raw data in publications is very promising.

http://blogs.openaccesscentral.com/blogs/bmcblog/entry/towards_agreement
_on_
best_practice

Cheers

Cameron 

--
Scanned by iCritical.

_______________________________________________
open-science mailing list
open-science at lists.okfn.org
http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science


From heatherm at eln.bc.ca  Thu Mar 19 20:34:23 2009
From: heatherm at eln.bc.ca (Heather Morrison)
Date: Thu, 19 Mar 2009 13:34:23 -0700
Subject: [open-science] Why not publish data? (Neylon, DC (Cameron))
In-Reply-To: <93f340550903190026v1d8c9c0dkb5c7d32d35263f3d@mail.gmail.com>
References: <93f340550903190026v1d8c9c0dkb5c7d32d35263f3d@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <3A522BB9-2AD4-4C30-B7A4-3C39134A89F2@eln.bc.ca>

On 19-Mar-09, at 12:26 AM, Tim Schweizer wrote:

> I think Cameron is hinting at a major problem (this is my  
> interpretation, so if I'm wrong, blame me, not Cameron).
>
> The incentives are biased towards anything that builds CVs. So, we  
> have way too many journals that are underwritten by libraries. Even  
> the editors of journals have admitted that very few people read the  
> journals - they exist solely as a means build CVs. In my opinion,  
> if 95% of the world's journals disappeared, there would be no loss  
> in learning or knowledge.

Marcus Banks talks about the idea of having blogs replace journals in  
the field of library and information science, as quoted in Walt  
Crawford's "Cites and Insights", at:
http://citesandinsights.info/v9i5c.htm

As someone who has blogged, written for, reviewed, and edited,  
journals, I think Marcus has a point.

Also, as has been pointed out before on this list, there should be  
ways for researchers to be appropriately credited for creating and  
sharing datasets.  Participation in wikis and such-like should count,  
too.

>
>
> Most people cannot risk studying what they find *really* profound  
> and interesting. The risk of pursuing those hypothesis are high in  
> terms of not getting the work published (not getting credit for the  
> pursuit of their best ideas on the CV). This is the great tragedy.

There is more that is worthy of examination in scholarship than just  
access issues, affordability, and metrics for perfromance  
evaluation.  We would all be better off if our scholars had both  
scope and incentive to pursue the questions that really matter, in my  
opinion; and sometimes, it is only the scholars themselves who  
understand what really matters.  My hope is that current discussions  
about scholarly communication will open the door for these more  
profound discussions.  My understanding is that the idea of tenure  
came from faculty themselves; the main purpose of tenure is to ensure  
academic freedom.  The tenure and promotion committee may seem  
external to each individual scholar, but it is not.  If scholars wish  
things to change, the door is theirs (ours) to open.

Any opinion expressed in this e-mail is that of the author alone, and  
does not represent the opinion or policy of BC Electronic Library  
Network or Simon Fraser University Library.

Heather Morrison, MLIS
The Imaginary Journal of Poetic Economics
http://poeticeconomics.blogspot.com
>


Heather G. Morrison
Project Coordinator
BC Electronic Library Network
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Phone:  778-782-7001
Fax: 778.782.3023
Email:  heatherm at eln.bc.ca
Web: http://www.eln.bc.ca





From wilbanks at creativecommons.org  Thu Mar 26 18:00:28 2009
From: wilbanks at creativecommons.org (John Wilbanks)
Date: Thu, 26 Mar 2009 14:00:28 -0400
Subject: [open-science] analysis of gene wikis?
Message-ID: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>

I'm trying to track down the google spreadsheet i saw a while back 
analysing how many uses (users, edits, etc) that various gene wikis have 
   reported. I'm having no luck on the googles.

Can anyone help? SC t-shirt to the first answer, for your wearing 
pleasure (if you agree with us) or for ironic use (if you don't)...

jtw

-- 

----------------------------------------------------------------
John Wilbanks

VP for Science, Creative Commons
http://creativecommons.org
http://sciencecommons.org
http://neurocommons.org

"We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
----------------------------------------------------------------


From mn at michaelnielsen.org  Thu Mar 26 18:16:22 2009
From: mn at michaelnielsen.org (Michael Nielsen)
Date: Thu, 26 Mar 2009 14:16:22 -0400 (Eastern Daylight Time)
Subject: [open-science] analysis of gene wikis?
In-Reply-To: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>
References: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>
Message-ID: <alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>


John - I think you want:

http://friendfeed.com/e/4ad4515b-fd30-4f9f-bf5c-6a1381692fdc/Comparison-of-biological-wikis/

Michael

On Thu, 26 Mar 2009, John Wilbanks wrote:

> I'm trying to track down the google spreadsheet i saw a while back
> analysing how many uses (users, edits, etc) that various gene wikis have
>   reported. I'm having no luck on the googles.
>
> Can anyone help? SC t-shirt to the first answer, for your wearing
> pleasure (if you agree with us) or for ironic use (if you don't)...
>
> jtw
>
> -- 
>
> ----------------------------------------------------------------
> John Wilbanks
>
> VP for Science, Creative Commons
> http://creativecommons.org
> http://sciencecommons.org
> http://neurocommons.org
>
> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>


From wilbanks at creativecommons.org  Thu Mar 26 18:18:25 2009
From: wilbanks at creativecommons.org (John Wilbanks)
Date: Thu, 26 Mar 2009 14:18:25 -0400
Subject: [open-science] analysis of gene wikis?
In-Reply-To: <alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>
References: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>
	<alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>
Message-ID: <49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>

ahhhhh, yes. michael gets the shirt.

jtw

Michael Nielsen wrote:
> 
> John - I think you want:
> 
> http://friendfeed.com/e/4ad4515b-fd30-4f9f-bf5c-6a1381692fdc/Comparison-of-biological-wikis/ 
> 
> 
> Michael
> 
> On Thu, 26 Mar 2009, John Wilbanks wrote:
> 
>> I'm trying to track down the google spreadsheet i saw a while back
>> analysing how many uses (users, edits, etc) that various gene wikis have
>>   reported. I'm having no luck on the googles.
>>
>> Can anyone help? SC t-shirt to the first answer, for your wearing
>> pleasure (if you agree with us) or for ironic use (if you don't)...
>>
>> jtw
>>
>> -- 
>>
>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>> John Wilbanks
>>
>> VP for Science, Creative Commons
>> http://creativecommons.org
>> http://sciencecommons.org
>> http://neurocommons.org
>>
>> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>
>> _______________________________________________
>> open-science mailing list
>> open-science at lists.okfn.org
>> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>>

-- 

----------------------------------------------------------------
John Wilbanks

VP for Science, Creative Commons
http://creativecommons.org
http://sciencecommons.org
http://neurocommons.org

"We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
----------------------------------------------------------------


From rufus.pollock at okfn.org  Thu Mar 26 19:10:57 2009
From: rufus.pollock at okfn.org (Rufus Pollock)
Date: Thu, 26 Mar 2009 19:10:57 +0000
Subject: [open-science] analysis of gene wikis?
In-Reply-To: <49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>
References: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>
	<alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>
	<49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>
Message-ID: <b68e90820903261210m13f9065m68b1c6b59c7d66b3@mail.gmail.com>

Better than a search engine :)

One question I had (not having looked through the whole list in
detail): are those projects producing "data" or human-readable
summaries (encyclopaedia articles) -- or a mixture of both. (Also, not
knowing the area well: is there a difference? I.e. are there agreed
ways of putting out "structured" information about gene and protein
function or is it just "free text"?)

In any case it's a fantastic listing and it would be worth adding to
http://www.ckan.net/. If anyone knows of any other listings of *open*
science datasets it would be great to hear about them. BTW: already
listed science "packages" can be found here:
<http://www.ckan.net/tag/read/science>

Rufus

2009/3/26 John Wilbanks <wilbanks at creativecommons.org>:
> ahhhhh, yes. michael gets the shirt.
>
> jtw
>
> Michael Nielsen wrote:
>>
>> John - I think you want:
>>
>> http://friendfeed.com/e/4ad4515b-fd30-4f9f-bf5c-6a1381692fdc/Comparison-of-biological-wikis/
>>
>>
>> Michael
>>
>> On Thu, 26 Mar 2009, John Wilbanks wrote:
>>
>>> I'm trying to track down the google spreadsheet i saw a while back
>>> analysing how many uses (users, edits, etc) that various gene wikis have
>>> ? reported. I'm having no luck on the googles.
>>>
>>> Can anyone help? SC t-shirt to the first answer, for your wearing
>>> pleasure (if you agree with us) or for ironic use (if you don't)...
>>>
>>> jtw
>>>
>>> --
>>>
>>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>> John Wilbanks
>>>
>>> VP for Science, Creative Commons
>>> http://creativecommons.org
>>> http://sciencecommons.org
>>> http://neurocommons.org
>>>
>>> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
>>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>>
>>> _______________________________________________
>>> open-science mailing list
>>> open-science at lists.okfn.org
>>> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>>>
>
> --
>
> ----------------------------------------------------------------
> John Wilbanks
>
> VP for Science, Creative Commons
> http://creativecommons.org
> http://sciencecommons.org
> http://neurocommons.org
>
> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>
> _______________________________________________
> open-science mailing list
> open-science at lists.okfn.org
> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>


From wilbanks at creativecommons.org  Thu Mar 26 20:08:44 2009
From: wilbanks at creativecommons.org (John Wilbanks)
Date: Thu, 26 Mar 2009 16:08:44 -0400
Subject: [open-science] analysis of gene wikis?
In-Reply-To: <b68e90820903261210m13f9065m68b1c6b59c7d66b3@mail.gmail.com>
References: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>	
	<alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>	
	<49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>
	<b68e90820903261210m13f9065m68b1c6b59c7d66b3@mail.gmail.com>
Message-ID: <49CBE0CC.70805@creativecommons.org>

The irony of Google not searching open Google spreadsheets is not lost 
here.

As to the human readable v. machine readable bit, I'd say the answer is 
in between. It's hard for both to read and re-use...

jtw

Rufus Pollock wrote:
> Better than a search engine :)
> 
> One question I had (not having looked through the whole list in
> detail): are those projects producing "data" or human-readable
> summaries (encyclopaedia articles) -- or a mixture of both. (Also, not
> knowing the area well: is there a difference? I.e. are there agreed
> ways of putting out "structured" information about gene and protein
> function or is it just "free text"?)
> 
> In any case it's a fantastic listing and it would be worth adding to
> http://www.ckan.net/. If anyone knows of any other listings of *open*
> science datasets it would be great to hear about them. BTW: already
> listed science "packages" can be found here:
> <http://www.ckan.net/tag/read/science>
> 
> Rufus
> 
> 2009/3/26 John Wilbanks <wilbanks at creativecommons.org>:
>> ahhhhh, yes. michael gets the shirt.
>>
>> jtw
>>
>> Michael Nielsen wrote:
>>> John - I think you want:
>>>
>>> http://friendfeed.com/e/4ad4515b-fd30-4f9f-bf5c-6a1381692fdc/Comparison-of-biological-wikis/
>>>
>>>
>>> Michael
>>>
>>> On Thu, 26 Mar 2009, John Wilbanks wrote:
>>>
>>>> I'm trying to track down the google spreadsheet i saw a while back
>>>> analysing how many uses (users, edits, etc) that various gene wikis have
>>>>   reported. I'm having no luck on the googles.
>>>>
>>>> Can anyone help? SC t-shirt to the first answer, for your wearing
>>>> pleasure (if you agree with us) or for ironic use (if you don't)...
>>>>
>>>> jtw
>>>>
>>>> --
>>>>
>>>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>>> John Wilbanks
>>>>
>>>> VP for Science, Creative Commons
>>>> http://creativecommons.org
>>>> http://sciencecommons.org
>>>> http://neurocommons.org
>>>>
>>>> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
>>>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>
>>>> _______________________________________________
>>>> open-science mailing list
>>>> open-science at lists.okfn.org
>>>> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>>>>
>> --
>>
>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>> John Wilbanks
>>
>> VP for Science, Creative Commons
>> http://creativecommons.org
>> http://sciencecommons.org
>> http://neurocommons.org
>>
>> "We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
>> ----------------------------------------------------------------
>>
>> _______________________________________________
>> open-science mailing list
>> open-science at lists.okfn.org
>> http://lists.okfn.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/open-science
>>

-- 

----------------------------------------------------------------
John Wilbanks

VP for Science, Creative Commons
http://creativecommons.org
http://sciencecommons.org
http://neurocommons.org

"We make sharing easy, legal, and scalable."
----------------------------------------------------------------


From delfanti at sissa.it  Sun Mar 29 22:30:25 2009
From: delfanti at sissa.it (Alessandro Delfanti)
Date: Sun, 29 Mar 2009 23:30:25 +0200
Subject: [open-science] call for submissions: user-led science
In-Reply-To: <49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>
References: <49CBC2BC.5060109@creativecommons.org>
	<alpine.WNT.2.00.0903261415570.4576@Default-PC>
	<49CBC6F1.50801@creativecommons.org>
Message-ID: <20090329233025.2sk3q1vluok4okow@webmail.sissa.it>

Call for articles:
User-led Science - A special issue of JCOM, Journal of Science Communication

Deadline: May 15, 2009
http://jcom.sissa.it/call

Science is increasingly being produced, discussed and deliberated with  
cooperative tools by web users and without the istitutionalized  
presence of scientists. "Popular science" or "Citizen science" are two  
of the traditional ways of defining science grassroots produced  
outside the walls of laboratories. But the internet has changed the  
way of collecting and organising the knowledge produced by people -  
peers - who do not belong to the established scientific community. In  
this issue we want to discuss:

- How web tools are changing and widening this way of participating in  
the production of scientific knowledge. Do this increase in  
participation consist in a real shift towards democratizing science or  
on the contrary is merely a rhetoric which do not affect the  
asymmetrical relationships between citizens and institutions?

- The ways in which both academic and private scientific institutions  
are appropriating this knowledge and its value. Do we need a new model  
to understand these ways of production and appropriation? Are they  
part of a deeper change in productive paradigms?

We would like to collect both theoretical contributions and research  
articles which address for example case studies in social media and  
science, peer production, the role of private firms in exploiting web  
arenas to collect scientific/medical data from their costumers, online  
social movements challenging communication incumbents, web tools for  
development.

Interested authors should submit an extended abstract of no more than  
500 words (in English) to the issue editor by May 15, 2009. We will  
select three to five papers for inclusion in this special issue.  
Abstracts should be sent to the JCOM's editorial office  
(jcom-eo at jcom.sissa.it) by email.

----------------------------------------------------------------
   SISSA Webmail https://webmail.sissa.it/
   Powered by Horde http://www.horde.org/




